# TOPIC: acute_bronchitis

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 4. Bronchitis | p.45-51 | audience=general] ---
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book29
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
4. Bronchitis
Key messages
• Antibiotics are not needed for most cases.
• Acute bronchitis usually presents as a persistent cough, with or without mild fever.
• Almost all cases are viral and self-limiting; patients should be informed that cough can last 
several weeks.
• Yellow/green colour of the sputum does not indicate bacterial infection and the need for 
antibiotics.
• Clinical presentation can differentiate bronchitis from pneumonia. 
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Pocket book of hospital care for children: guidelines for the management of common 
childhood illnesses, 2013 (31).
• Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic (32).
• Living guidance for clinical management of COVID-19: living guidance, 23 November 2021 (33).
• Therapeutics and COVID-19: living guideline, 16 September 2022 (34).
• Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in infants and children under 5 years of age: WHO 
position paper –February 2019 (35).
• Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) vaccination position paper – July 2013: Introduction (36).
• Vaccines against influenza: WHO position paper – May 2022 (37).
Definition
Acute bronchitis is a self-limiting inflammation of the trachea and bronchi characterized by 
persistent cough, with or without fever, usually caused by a viral infection (38).
30
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
4. Bronchitis
Bronchitis
Treatment
•S ymptomatic tr eatmen t
•B r onchodilators (in case of wheezing), mucolytic or
antitussiv e agents , can be consider ed based on local
prac tices and patient pr efer ences
Pa tients should be informed that:
•G re at majorit y of cases ar e self-limiting and of viral origin
•C ough can persist for sev eral w eeks
No Antibiotic Care
Medicines are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options
Symptomatic Treatment
De/g246nition Most Likely Pathogens
Ibupr ofen 200-400 mg q6-8h (Max 2.4 g/day)
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Pa racetamol (acetaminophen) 500 mg-1 g
q4-6h (max 4 g/day)
•: Max 2 g/da yHepatic impairment/cirrhosis
Antibiotic treatment is not recommended and should be
avoided as ther e is no evidence of a signi/g246cant clinical
bene/g246t and ther e is a risk of side effec ts of antibiotics
Antibiotic Treatment
Diagnosis
Clinical Presentation
Usually not needed; consider testing for In/g248uenza virus or
SARS -C oV -2 (e .g . during in/g248uenza season or outbr eaks
based on local epidemiological risk/situation/pr otocols)
Microbiology Tests
Usually not needed
Other LaboratoryTests
Usually not needed
Imaging
•A cute onset (<2 w eeks) of cough lasting > 5 days +/-
sputum pr oduc tion and shor tness of br eath (colour of the
sputum does not indicate bac terial infec tion) +/- fe ve r
(≥ 38.0 °C )
•G enerally a mild condition; cough usually lasts 10-20 days
(can last longer)
Important: Symptoms can ov erlap with pneumonia
and this can lead to inappr opriate tr eatment with
antibiotics .T his should be av oided with a car eful
patient assessmen t
•: L ess sev er e pr esentation, usually self-Bronchitis
limiting (but cough may take w eeks to r esolv e)
•Pneumonia (see "Community-acquired
pneumonia" infographic): Mo re sev er e pr esentation
with shor tness of br eath and systemic signs of
infec tion (e .g . incr eased hear t and r espirator y rate )
Respiratory viruses:
•R hinovirus
•I n/g248uenza virus (A and B)
•P arain/g248uenza virus
•C or onavirus (including SARS -C oV -2)
•R espirator y sync ytial virus (RSV )
•M etapneumovirus
•A denovirus
•O ther r espirator y viruses
A self-limiting inflammation of the trachea and br onchi
charac terized by persistent cough +/- fev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) usually
caused by a viral infec tion
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
31
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
4. Bronchitis
Bronchitis
•A cute onset of cough lasting > 5 days , usually with runn y
nose and mild fe ve r, with no clinical signs of pneumonia
•G enerally a mild condition, cough usually lasts 1-3 w eeks
De/g246nition
Diagnosis
Clinical Presentation
Important: Symptoms can ov erlap with pneumonia
and this can lead to inappr opriate tr eatment with
antibiotics .T his should be av oided with a car eful
patient assessmen t
•: L ess sev er e pr esentation, usually self-Bronchitis
limiting (but cough may take w eeks to r esolv e)
•Pneumonia (see "Community-acquired
pneumonia" infographic): Mo re sev er e pr esentation
with shor tness of br eath and systemic signs of
infec tion (e .g . incr eased hear t and r espirator y rate )
Usually not needed; consider testing for In/g248uenza virus or
SARS -C oV -2 (e .g . during in/g248uenza season or outbr eaks
based on local epidemiological risk/situation/pr otocols)
Microbiology Tests
Usually not needed
Other LaboratoryTests
Usually not needed
Imaging
Most Likely Pathogens
Treatment
•S ymptomatic tr eatmen t
•B r onchodilators (in case of wheezing), mucolytic or
antitussiv e agents , can be consider ed based on local
prac tices and patient pr efer ences
Pa tients/par ents should be informed that:
•G re at majorit y of cases ar e self-limiting and of viral origin
•C ough can persist for sev eral w eeks
No Antibiotic Care
Medicines are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options
Symptomatic Treatment
Antibiotic treatment is not recommended and should be
avoided as ther e is no evidence of a signi/g246cant clinical
bene/g246t and ther e is a risk of side effec ts of antibiotics
Antibiotic Treatment
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Pa racetamol (acetaminophen)
•: 10-15 mg/kg q6hPain control/antipyretic
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 60 mg q6h
6-<10 kg 100 mg q6h
10-<15 kg 150 mg q6h
15-<20 kg 200 mg q6h
20-<30 kg 300 mg q6h
≥30 kg 500 mg-1 g q4-6h
(Max 4 g/day or 2 g/day if
hepatic impairment/cirrhosis)
Ibupr ofen (do not use if <3 months of age)
•: 5-10 mg/kg q6-8hPain control/antipyretic
•:Oral weight bands
6-<10 kg 50 mg q8h
10-<15 kg 100 mg q8h
15-<20 kg 150 mg q8h
20-<30 kg 200 mg q8h
≥30 kg 200-400 mg q6-8h
(Max 2.4 g/day)
Respiratory viruses:
•R hinovirus
•I n/g248uenza virus (A and B)
•P arain/g248uenza virus
•C or onavirus (including SARS -C oV -2)
•R espirator y sync ytial virus (RSV )
•M etapneumovirus
•A denovirus
•O ther r espirator y viruses
A self-limiting inflammation of the trachea and br onchi
charac terized by persistent cough +/- fev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) usually
caused by a viral infec tion
32The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
4. Bronchitis
Pathophysiology
Acute bronchitis is caused by tissue damage of the bronchial wall and inflammatory 
response triggered by the proliferation of microorganisms in the affected bronchi.
Epidemiology 
Acute bronchitis is a very common condition that can affect people of all ages, mostly during 
the seasons when respiratory viruses are common. Smoking and exposure to air pollution 
are risk factors. Acute bronchitis is one of the most common reasons for consultations in the 
primary health care setting and it is associated with frequent unnecessary use of antibiotics 
both in children and adults (39–41).
Most likely pathogens
A causative pathogen is not identified in most cases of acute bronchitis. Most cases of acute 
bronchitis are of viral origin (Table 4.1).
Table 4.1 – Pathogens most frequently associated with acute bronchitis (in 
descending order of frequency)
Respiratory viruses
Rhinovirus
Influenza virus (A and B)
Parainfluenza virus 
Coronavirus (including SARS-CoV-2)
Respiratory syncytial virus 
Metapneumovirus
Adenovirus
Other respiratory viruses
SARS-CoV-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
Note. Nearly all cases of acute bronchitis have a viral origin. Only in a very small proportion of cases, are atypical 
pathogens (Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae) involved. Atypical bacteria are intracellular and are 
colourless with Gram staining. They also have intrinsic resistance to beta-lactams either because they lack a cell 
wall (Mycoplasma) and / or are intracellular pathogens (Chlamydia).
Clinical presentation
Well-established clinical features of acute bronchitis include acute onset (less than 2 weeks) 
of cough lasting > 5 days with or without sputum production (of note yellow/green sputum
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book33
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
4. Bronchitis
does not indicate a bacterial infection). Bronchitis is generally a mild condition with no 
tachycardia (i.e. no increased heart rate) or tachypnoea (i.e. no increased respiratory rate) 
and in most cases of acute bronchitis there is no fever. Cough usually persists for 10-20 days 
(around 1–3 weeks) but it can last longer.
Because the predominant symptoms are cough with or without fever, these 
symptoms can overlap with the clinical picture of pneumonia. As a result, patients can be 
incorrectly diagnosed as having pneumonia in the initial assessment and are often therefore 
inappropriately treated with antibiotics. This misdiagnosis can be avoided with careful 
patient assessment to clearly differentiate the two infections.
Usually, patients with pneumonia:
• are clinically unwell and with systemic signs of infection (e.g. fever, increased 
heart rate, increased respiratory rate or focal chest signs),
• are short of breath,
• have cough with sputum production. 
Please refer to the chapter on community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) for the typical 
clinical presentation of patients with pneumonia.
In patients with pre-existing chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD), please 
refer to the chapter on this condition.
Laboratory tests
Patient microbiology tests
No microbiology test is usually required.
During the influenza season or in case of outbreaks, a nasopharyngeal swab to test 
for influenza could be considered. Local policies should be followed as to whether during the 
coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic a nasopharyngeal swab or other sample (e.g. 
pharyngeal swab or saliva) for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) 
testing (nucleic acid amplification test or rapid antigen test) should be obtained. Refer to the 
latest WHO guidelines for the management of patients with suspected SARS-CoV-2 infection.
Other tests
In the great majority of cases of bronchitis, laboratory tests are not needed.
In uncertain cases some experts advocate the use of biomarkers of infection 
(C-reactive protein, procalcitonin) to differentiate viral bronchitis from bacterial pneumonia, 
but these add costs and can also result in inappropriate prescribing due to the limited 
sensitivity and specificity of these tests.
34The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
4. Bronchitis
Using microbiology surveillance data
As antibiotics are not recommended no routine microbiology surveillance is required. 
Surveillance of circulating respiratory viruses can be useful to predict and follow 
epidemics and outbreaks, for example, SARS-CoV-2, influenza virus and respiratory 
syncytial virus.
Imaging
Imaging is usually not needed.
No antibiotic care 
Patients or parents should be informed about the natural course of acute bronchitis. It 
should be explained that the cough can persist for several weeks, often at night, the great 
majority of cases are self-limiting (and of viral origin) and there is no benefit from a course 
of antibiotic treatment. For symptomatic care for cold or mild influenza symptoms refer to 
Table 4.2. There is no clear evidence to support the usefulness of bronchodilators (in case of 
wheezing), or mucolytic or antitussive agents, but their use could be considered based on 
local practices and patient preferences.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book35
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
4. Bronchitis
Table 4.2 – Medicines to consider for symptomatic treatment of acute bronchitis
Important
Medicines are listed in alphabetical order and they should all be considered equal treatment options.
Medicine Formulation Dose and frequency
Ibuprofena Oral liquid: 200 mg/5 mL
Tablet: 200 mg; 400 mg; 
600 mg
Adults: 200–400 mg given every 6 to 8 
hours (maximum dose of 2.4 g a day)
Children: 
• Pain control/antipyretic treatment: 
5–10 mg/kg given every 6 to 8 hours
6–< 10 kg: 50 mg given every 8 hours
10–< 15 kg: 100 mg given every 8 hours
15–< 20 kg: 150 mg given every 8 hours
20–< 30 kg: 200 mg given every 8 hours
≥ 30 kg: use adult dose
Paracetamol 
(acetaminophen)b
Oral liquid: 120 mg/5 mL; 
125 mg/5 mL
Suppository: 100 mg
Tablet: 100 mg to 500 mg
Adults: 500 mg–1 g given every 4 to 6 
hours (maximum dose of 4 g a day)c
Children:
• Pain control/antipyretic treatment: 
10–15 mg/kg given every 6 hours
3–< 6 kg: 60 mg given every 6 hours
6–< 10 kg: 100 mg given every 6 hours
10–< 15 kg: 150 mg given every 6 hours
15–< 20 kg: 200 mg given every 6 hours
20–< 30 kg: 300 mg given every 6 hours
≥ 30 kg: use adult dose
a Not for children < 3 months.
b Not recommended for use as an anti-inflammatory as it has not been proven to have such an effect.
c In patients with hepatic impairment or cirrhosis, maximum daily dose should be 2 g.
Antibiotic treatment 
Antibiotic treatment is not recommended for acute bronchitis and should be avoided. 
There is no evidence of a meaningful clinical benefit of antibiotics and their use is not 
supported by the available clinical evidence (42).

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 5.2.1 Bronchiolitis | p.410-412 | audience=general] ---
Acute inflammatory obstructive disease of small airways (bronchioles)
common in children less than 2 years.
Causes
~ Mainly viral (often respiratory syncitial virus, RSV)
~ Mycoplasma
Clinical features
~ First 24-72 hours: rhinopharyngitis with dry cough
~ Later tachypnoea, difficulty in breathing, wheezing (poorly
responsive to bronchodilators)
~ Cough (profuse, frothy, obstructive secretions)
~ Mucoid nasal discharge
~ Moderate or no fever
~ Criteria for severity: child < 3 months, worsening of general
condition, pallor, cyanosis, respiratory distress, anxiety, respiratory rate >60/minute, difficulty feeding, SpO2 < 92%
Differential diagnosis
~ Asthma
344
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
~ Pneumonia, whooping cough
~ Foreign body inhalation
~ Heart failure
Investigations
- Clinical diagnosis
- X-ray: Chest (to exclude pneumonia)
- Blood: Haemogram
TREATMENT LOC
Mild-moderate bronchiolitis
Wheezing, 50-60 breaths/minute, no cyanosis, able to drink/feed
- Treat the symptoms (possibly as an out-patient)
- Nasal irrigation with normal saline
- Small, frequent feeds
- Increased fluids and nutrition
- Treat fever (paracetamol)
Severe bronchiolitis
Wheezing, fast breathing > 60 breaths/min, cyanosis
- Admit and give supportive treatment as above f Give
humidified nasal oxygen (1-2 litres/min) f Salbutamol
inhaler 100 micrograms/puff: 2 puffs with spacer, every
30 minutes or nebulisation salbutamol 2.5 mg in 4 ml
normal saline.
- If symptoms improve, continue salbutamol every
6 hours
- If symptoms non-responsive, stop the salbutamol
- Nebulise Adrenaline 1:1000, 1 ml diluted in 2-4 ml
normal saline every 2-4 hours
- Give as much oral fluids as the child will take:
e.g. ORS. Use NGT or IV line if child cannot take orally
- Give basic total fluid requirement of 150 ml/kg in
24 hours plus extra to cover increased losses due
to illness
345
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
Note
- Antibiotics are usually not needed for bronchiolitis since
it is viral.
- Steroids are not recommended
Prevention
- Avoid exposure to cold and viral infections
- Proper handwashing after contact with patients

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 5.2.2 Acute Bronchitis | p.412-413 | audience=general] ---
Acute inflammatory disease of the bronchi.
Causes
~ Mostly viral
~ In older children, can be caused by Mycoplasma pneumonae
~ Secondary Bacterial infection: Streptococcus pneumoniae,
Haemophilus influenzae
Predisposing factors
~ Exposure to cold, dust, smoke
~ Cigarette smoking
Clinical features
~ Often starts with rhinopharyngitis, descend progressively
to larynx, pharynx, tracheitis
~ Irritating, productive cough sometimes with scanty mucoid, blood streaked sputum
~ Chest tightness, sometimes with wheezing
~ Fever may be present
~ No tachypnoea or dyspnoea
~ Secondary bacterial infection: fever > 38.5°C, dyspnoea,
purulent expectorations
346
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
Differential diagnosis
~ Bronchial asthma, emphysema
~ Pneumonia, tuberculosis
Investigations
- Diagnosis based on clinical features
- Chest X-ray
TREATMENT LOC
- Most cases are viral and mild
- Paracetamol 1 g every 4-6 hours (max: 4 g daily)
- Child: 10 mg/kg (max: 500 mg) per dose f Plenty of
oral fluids
- Children: nasal irrigation with normal saline to clear
the airway
- Local remedies for cough (honey, ginger, lemon)
If there is suspicion of bacterial infection, especially if patient is
in general poor conditions (malnutrition, measles, rickets, severe
anaemia, elderly, cardiac disease)
- Give Amoxicillin 500 mg every 8 hours
Child: 40 mg/kg dispersible tablets every 12 hours
- Or Doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours
Child >8 years: 2 mg/kg per dose
HC2
Prevention
~ Avoid predisposing factors above.
