# TOPIC: antibiotic_allergy

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 3. Allergy to antibiotics | p.36-42 | audience=general] ---
20The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
3. Allergy to antibiotics
Key messages
• True severe allergy to antibiotics is rare and allergies are often over-reported
• Beta-lactam antibiotics (penicillins and cephalosporins) of the Access group are among the 
most effective and safe medicines for many infections, and they should only be avoided 
when there is a high suspicion of true allergy.
• Cephalosporins and carbapenems can be safely used in most cases of non-severe penicillin 
allergy.
• All patients who are labelled as allergic should be carefully evaluated and their antibiotic 
allergy risk level should be determined.
• Routine skin testing before prescribing a beta-lactam antibiotic (e.g. penicillin or amoxicillin) 
is not needed, and direct oral challenge can be performed in carefully selected low-risk 
phenotypes.
The AWaRe book does not include alternative antibiotic options in cases of allergy to firstchoice antibiotics. The reason for this is that a true allergy to antibiotics (true meaning an 
allergic reaction that is immune-mediated) is rare and the AWaRe book focuses on the 
empiric treatment options for most patients. Beta-lactam antibiotics of the Access group 
are among the most effective and safe medicines for many infections. Avoiding the use of 
this class, unless clearly justified because of severe allergy, exposes the patient to the risk of 
receiving suboptimal treatment for their infection.
This chapter on allergy describes general principles of the mechanisms of allergies 
to antibiotics and the implications for treatment. From the perspective of antibiotic 
stewardship, it is important to avoid over-diagnosing antibiotic allergies. Such overdiagnosis often occurs with antibiotics in the Access category (e.g. with penicillins) and 
can lead to the subsequent prescription of antibiotics in the Watch category, for example, 
macrolides that may be less effective and less safe. The detailed management of allergic 
reactions is beyond the scope of this chapter.
Definitions
• An allergy is a reaction of the immune system to a “non-self” substance.
• An adverse reaction is a response to a medicine which is harmful and 
unintended, and which occurs at the doses normally used (23). Most adverse
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book21
3. Allergy to antibiotics 
reactions can be classified as type A or type B reactions (Table 3.1) depending on 
whether or not their effects are related to the primary mechanism of action of the 
medicine (type A, i.e. if they are predictable based on the mechanism of action or 
not) and also whether the immune system is involved (type B, i.e. hypersensitivity 
reactions) (24). Most patients with type A adverse reactions (e.g. nausea, vomiting, 
headache and injection site reactions) should not be labelled as having a betalactam allergy, to prevent avoidance of beta-lactam antibiotics.
• A hypersensitivity reaction is any adverse reaction that is immunologically 
mediated. Hypersensitivity reactions are type B reactions and can be classified based 
on the timing of onset of symptoms after taking the antibiotic as well as on the 
underlying mechanism, that is, immediate reactions (potentially IgE-mediated) or 
delayed reactions (potentially T cell-mediated). Immediate reactions usually occur 
within 1–2 hours of taking the antibiotic and delayed reactions usually after more 
than 6–24 hours. Reactions occurring within 2–6 hours are often called accelerated.
Table 3.1 – Characteristics of adverse reactions to medicines
Type A (or on-target) adverse reactiona: 
characteristics
Type B (or off-target) adverse reactiona: 
characteristics
• Pharmacologically predictable
• Dose/level dependent
• Non-immune mediated
• Less influenced by genetic factors
Examples: antibiotic-associated diarrhoea 
and acute tubular necrosis due to 
aminoglycosides
• Pharmacologically unpredictable
• Non-dose dependent
• Often immunologically mediated 
hypersensitivity reactionsb (IgE or T-cell 
mediated)
Examples: skin exanthema, angioedema or 
anaphylaxis (immune-mediated)
a On-target (or augmented) means the effects are related to the primary mechanism of action of the medicine. 
Off-target means the effects are not related to the primary mechanism of action of the medicine.
b These reactions are immunologically mediated. They can be immediate (< 2 hours), accelerated (2–6 hours) or 
delayed (> 6 hours) reactions based on when symptoms appear after the administration of the antibiotic.
Epidemiology
Allergies to medicines are frequently self-reported, especially for antibiotics (25) with 5–15% 
of patients in high-income countries reporting a penicillin allergy (24). However, in most 
cases (> 95%), these patients do not have a true immunologically mediated allergy and it is 
very likely that they can tolerate the antibiotic if re-exposed or challenged (26).
Severe allergies to antibiotics (e.g. anaphylactic shock) are rare; nonetheless, antibiotics 
are the most common cause of life-threatening immunologically mediated reactions (24).
22The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 3. Allergy to antibiotics
Allergy to antibiotics is often over-diagnosed and patients are frequently labelled in health 
records as allergic to certain antibiotics (particularly to beta-lactams and sulfonamides) based 
on an unverified, vague, unknown or old (e.g. > 10 years) history of allergy reported by the 
patient, most often rashes. In most cases, these patients are unlikely to have a true allergy to 
the antibiotic and they will be able to safely tolerate it. Alternative explanations may exist for 
what the patients experienced previously, such as: (i) the antibiotic may have interacted with 
a concomitant infection, for example, antibiotic–infection interactions can occur in case of 
viral infections (e.g. the rash observed in patients with infectious mononucleosis caused by 
Epstein–Barr virus exposed to amoxicillin); or (ii) there may have been an “intolerance”/type 
A adverse reaction of the antibiotic manifested as, for example, nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea 
or headache; or (iii) a viral rash may have been confused with an allergic reaction. In addition, 
it is important to bear in mind that even true allergies are not always long-lasting and may 
decrease or disappear over time (> 10 years) (26).
This over-diagnosis of allergy has important consequences because incorrectly 
labelling a patient as allergic to an antibiotic often results in the unnecessary use of 
alternative antibiotics. These alternatives may be less effective for the infection being treated 
and may expose the patient to other (sometimes more toxic) side-effects. 
Unfortunately, most patients with a history of allergy to antibiotics are not evaluated 
to confirm the existence (or persistence) of the allergy. 
Cross-reactivity
Antibiotic cross-reactivity refers to the development of an allergic reaction to different 
substances that have a closely related structure, for example, cross-reactivity can occur 
between penicillin and other beta-lactams (Table 3.2) (26–28), which may be due to an 
immunological reaction to the beta-lactam ring shared by these antibiotics.
In patients with true allergy, cross-reactivity may occur and is generally 
predictable based on shared beta-lactam structures (e.g. R1 side chains), with the most 
frequently encountered example being aminopenicillins (e.g. amoxicillin, ampicillin) and 
aminocephalosporins such as cephalexin.
Table 3.2 – Cross-reactivity to antibiotics
Penicillins with other 
beta-lactams
% of cross-reactivitya Safety of use
Penicillins and 
cephalosporins
< 2 Cephalosporins can be safely 
used in most cases of penicillin 
allergy and vice versab.
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book23
3. Allergy to antibiotics 
Table 3.2 continued
Penicillins with other 
beta-lactams
% of cross-reactivitya Safety of use
Penicillins and carbapenems < 1 Carbapenems can be safely 
used in most cases of penicillin 
allergy and vice versab.
Penicillins and monobactams 0 Monobactams can be safely 
used in case of penicillin, 
cephalosporins (except 
ceftazidime) or carbapenem 
allergyc.
a Percentage of patients allergic to penicillins that can develop an allergic reaction if exposed to a different betalactam (cephalosporins, carbapenems or monobactams).
b In cases of previous life-threatening reactions caused by the exposure to penicillins or other beta-lactams, any use 
of beta-lactams should be avoided, or an allergy specialist should be consulted.
c Monobactams can be safely used in cases of beta-lactam allergies except when there is an allergy to ceftazidime, 
a third-generation cephalosporin, because of similarities in the side chains of aztreonam and ceftazidime.
Clinical presentation
Signs and symptoms of antibiotic allergy can vary in severity, ranging from mild reactions 
that can be safely managed in an outpatient setting with or without need for symptomatic 
treatment (e.g. antihistamines) to severe reactions that require hospitalization and even 
admission to intensive care. Immediate and delayed reactions can be severe or non-severe.
Gastrointestinal symptoms and headache are not usually due to an allergic reaction 
but rather to an intolerance of the antibiotic that can vary in intensity from person to person 
or to Clostridioides difficile infection in case of diarrhoea. 
Most cases of allergic reactions to antibiotics are not severe and often present as mild 
skin reactions (most commonly mild rash, hives and itching) with no systemic symptoms.
Severe reactions are rare but can become life-threatening. They can be immediate 
or delayed after administration of the antibiotic.
• Immediate severe reactions should be suspected if there is airway involvement, 
bronchospasm, wheezing, angioedema (swelling of the tissue under the skin 
with or without hives) or anaphylaxis. Usually, these reactions develop fewer than 
4 hours after taking the antibiotic.
• Delayed severe reactions should be suspected in patients who have taken an 
antibiotic and present with severe skin symptoms (e.g. a painful blistering rash) and 
fever, joint pain or signs of organ involvement (e.g. hepatitis). Thrombocytopenia
24The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 3. Allergy to antibiotics
(low platelet count), haemolytic anaemia (destruction of red blood cells) and 
signs and symptoms of hepatitis or nephritis in severe cases are suggestive of 
organ involvement. Usually, these reactions develop more than 24 hours after 
taking the antibiotic.
Allergy evaluation 
All patients who are labelled as allergic should be carefully evaluated and their antibiotic 
allergy risk level should be determined. When evaluating a patient, a full history of their 
allergy should be taken from the patient with details of past reactions, including timing 
relative to antibiotic administration (immediate, intermediate, delayed or unknown) and 
treatment received (if any). Patients can be classified into three risk categories for allergy to 
antibiotics: low, moderate, and high risk; see Table 3.3 for examples but other assessment 
tools are also available (29,30). Detailed documentation of all elements of the allergy is 
crucial. The patient should be educated about what types of antibiotics to avoid, if any, and 
should be provided, if possible, with written information such as a so-called allergy passport.
Table 3.3 – Antibiotic allergy risk levels based on the patient’s allergy history
Allergy risk 
category
Examples
Low • Patients with a history of isolated symptoms consistent with intolerance 
of an antibiotic, such as nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea or headache
• Patients with a history of mild skin reactions especially if > 5 years before 
assessment
• Patients with local injection site reactions
• Patients with a history of unknown reactions a long time ago without 
features of immediate IgE-mediated reactions
• Patients with a family history of antibiotic allergy
Moderate • Patients with a history of acute onset urticaria 
• Patients with a history of reactions that look like IgE-mediated reactions 
but with no history of anaphylaxis
High • Patients with a history of severe or life-threatening reaction (immediate 
or delayed) to an antibiotic (e.g. anaphylaxis, Stevens–Johnson syndrome 
or blistering or mucosal involvement rash)
• Patients with a positive skin test
• Patients with recurrent reactions or reactions to multiple antibiotics
Source: Shenoy ES, et al (26).
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book25
3. Allergy to antibiotics 
Testing techniques for patients at low and moderate risk of antibiotic allergy include 
skin tests (this applies only to IgE-mediated reactions) and direct oral challenge tests. In 
direct oral challenge tests, a single therapeutic dose of the antibiotic is given orally to the 
patient under medical supervision with the ability to treat acute allergic responses. The 
patient should be kept under observation (usually at least 1-2 hours) to check for objective 
signs of an allergic reaction. A detailed description of different types of tests available is 
beyond the scope of this chapter. Routine skin testing before prescribing a beta-lactam 
antibiotic (e.g. penicillin and amoxicillin) is not needed in children or adults and should 
not be recommended in guidelines as this is an unnecessary barrier to the use of Access 
antibiotics. 
In settings where allergy testing, specialist advice or treatment for anaphylaxis 
are not available, then pragmatic decisions should be based on a detailed history of any 
reported possible penicillin allergy. A rapid risk assessment needs to be done, including 
the medical importance of the infection the patient is presenting with (i.e. benefit–risk 
assessment in that patient and whether an antibiotic is really needed) and the availability of 
alternative antibiotics with similar effectiveness. Please see the relevant infection chapters 
and symptomatic non-antibiotic treatment of minor infections within chapters.
Patients with a definite history of immediate collapse, breathing difficulties or severe 
facial swelling within a few minutes to 1–2 hours of taking a penicillin class of antibiotic are 
likely to have had a true anaphylactic reaction. If any alternative antibiotics are available, they 
are preferred. Patients who have only had gastrointestinal symptoms or a rash appearing a 
few days after receiving an antibiotic of the penicillin group and who have shown no signs 
of becoming seriously unwell are generally less likely to develop severe anaphylaxis if they 
receive such antibiotics again in the future. Therefore, if one of these antibiotics is the most 
appropriate and available treatment option, they can be given and the patient advised to 
stop it if they develop a new skin rash, especially if the onset is rapid, the rash is raised and 
itchy and/or accompanying symptoms are present such as shortness of breath.
26The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
