# TOPIC: aware_classification

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book | p.21-35 | audience=general] ---
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book5
2. Improving the use of antibiotics 
with the AWaRe book
Background
About 90% of all antibiotics are taken by patients in the primary health care setting. It is 
estimated that around half of all antibiotic use is inappropriate in some way, such as: the 
use of an antibiotic when none is indicated; the choice of an antibiotic with unnecessarily 
broad spectrum (e.g. Watch instead of Access antibiotics; see the following section); and the 
wrong dose, duration of treatment, and delivery or formulation of the antibiotic (7).
Note
The term antibiotic stewardship is preferred to antimicrobial stewardship and is used 
throughout the AWaRe book to acknowledge the fact that the book only provides guidance on 
antibiotic treatment. 
AWaRe 
The AWaRe book gives guidance on first- and second-choice antibiotics for common 
infections in line with the recommendations in the EML and EMLc (8,9). WHO has 
classified antibiotics into four groups, Access, Watch, Reserve (AWaRe) and a fourth – Not 
Recommended – group. As well as the antibiotics in the EML and EMLc, more than 200 
other antibiotics have now been classified into AWaRe groups to help inform local and 
national policy development and implementation (10). 
Access antibiotics have a narrow spectrum of activity, lower cost, a good safety 
profile and generally low resistance potential. They are often recommended as empiric first- 
or second-choice treatment options for common infections (see Box 2.1 for WHO’s target 
for their use).
Watch antibiotics are broader-spectrum antibiotics, generally with higher costs 
and are recommended only as first-choice options for patients with more severe clinical 
presentations or for infections where the causative pathogens are more likely to be resistant 
to Access antibiotics, such as upper urinary tract infections (UTIs). 
Reserve antibiotics are last-choice antibiotics used to treat multidrug-resistant 
infections (see chapter on Reserve antibiotics).
6The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
The AWaRe system is also represented as a traffic-light approach: Access = green, 
Watch = orange and Reserve = red. Simple graphics using the traffic light approach can be 
used to show the proportions of Access and Watch antibiotics used in settings such as a 
community clinic or pharmacy or as part of central monitoring of antibiotic consumption. 
Countries, regions and districts are encouraged to use the AWaRe book as a basis 
for developing their own quality indicators and targets for safely reducing total levels of 
inappropriate antibiotic prescribing to improve patient safety and care, while reducing 
resistant infections and costs for patients and health systems (see Box 2.2 for goals of the 
AWaRe book).
Box 2.1 – WHO target for the use of Access antibiotics
To promote responsible use of antibiotics and slow the spread of antibiotic resistance, the WHO 
Global Programme of Work includes a target that at least “60% of total antibiotic prescribing 
at the country level should be Access antibiotics by 2023” (11,12)
Box 2.2 – Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
• No antibiotic care – safely reducing antibiotic use
• Improving Access antibiotic use and reducing inappropriate use of oral and IV Watch antibiotics 
• Reducing the use of Not Recommended antibiotics 
• Improving AWaRe-ness!
• Improving appropriate antibiotic dosing and duration
No antibiotic care – safely reducing antibiotic use
Key messages
• Most otherwise healthy patients with mild common infections can be treated without 
antibiotics as these infections are frequently self-limiting and the potential medicinerelated adverse events outweigh the clinical benefits.
• The risks of taking antibiotics when they are not needed should always be considered, such as 
side-effects, allergic reactions, Clostridioides difficile infection and selection of resistant bacteria.
• Patients treated with symptomatic care only (no antibiotic care) should be clearly informed 
of what danger signs to monitor and what to do if they occur.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book7
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
Management of low risk (mild) infections in primary health care
Most infections encountered in primary health care are not caused by bacteria (e.g. most 
respiratory tract infections have a viral cause) and therefore the patient will not benefit 
from antibiotic treatment (Table 2.1). Even when the cause of the infection is bacterial, 
many infections are frequently self-limiting, with a low risk of severe complications and 
the benefit of antibiotics is limited, shortening of the duration of symptoms by usually 
only around 1 or 2 days. Most otherwise healthy patients with mild infections may safely 
receive symptomatic treatment alone, such as anti-inflammatory medicines, pain killers or 
complementary medicines. Whenever appropriate, guidance on diagnosing mild infections 
that can be treated with No Antibiotic Care is given in the AWaRe book.
Table 2.1 – Common infections in primary health care where mild cases can be 
safely treated with No Antibiotic Care (i.e. symptomatic management only) – see 
individual chapters for more details
Infection (in 
alphabetical 
order)
Can it be safely 
treated without 
antibiotics?
Comment
Acute diarrhoea Yes, in the great 
majority of cases 
(unless there is 
significant bloody 
diarrhoea)
Most cases do not require antibiotic 
treatment because the infection is of viral 
origin and the illness is usually self-limiting 
regardless of the causative pathogen. 
The cornerstone of treatment is rehydration 
and electrolyte replacement.
Bronchitis Yes Nearly all cases have a viral origin and there 
is no evidence that antibiotics are needed.
COPD 
exacerbations 
Yes, in most mild 
cases
Most exacerbations of COPD are not 
triggered by bacterial infections; only certain 
cases will benefit from antibiotic treatment.
Dental infections Yes, in most mild 
cases
Dental treatment rather than prescribing 
antibiotics is generally more appropriate in 
the management of dental infections.
Otitis media Yes, in most mild 
cases
Most mild cases of acute otitis media can 
be managed symptomatically and do not 
require antibiotic treatment.
Pharyngitis Yes, in most mild 
cases
Most cases do not require antibiotics 
because the infection is viral.a
continues
8The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
Table 2.1 continued
Infection (in 
alphabetical 
order)
Can it be safely 
treated without 
antibiotics?
Comment
Sinusitis Yes, in most mild 
cases
Most cases do not require antibiotics as the 
infections is viral.
Skin and soft tissue 
infections (mild)
Only for certain 
conditions and in 
certain patients
In cases of wounds at low risk of becoming 
infected, antibiotic treatment is not needed. 
In cases of animal bites, only wounds in 
high-risk anatomical locations and patients 
with severe immunosuppression benefit 
from antibiotic treatment.
Urinary tract 
infection (lower)
Only in very select 
patients with 
no risk factors 
for complicated 
infections
In young women who are not pregnant, 
with mild symptoms and who may wish 
to avoid or delay antibiotic treatment, 
symptomatic treatment alone can be 
considered.
COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
a Refer to the pharyngitis chapter for situations that require antibiotic treatment, for example, pharyngitis in settings 
where rheumatic fever is endemic.
Are antibiotics needed?
In 2006, WHO proposed that the percentage of patients attending a primary health care 
facility receiving an antibiotic should be less than 30% (13). However, on average, around 
half of patients presenting with any infection in primary care still receive an antibiotic, 
thus contributing to the emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) (14). It 
is therefore important that both health care professionals and patients consider the risks of 
taking antibiotics when they are not needed. These risks include the immediate risk of sideeffects of the medicine, most commonly diarrhoea or allergic reactions (such as a rash; see 
chapter on allergy to antibiotics) and rarely more serious side-effects. Bacteria in patients 
prescribed an antibiotic for a respiratory infection or a UTI – as examples of infections for 
which antibiotics are often prescribed – commonly develop antibiotic resistance to the 
prescribed (and other) antibiotics. These patients are also more likely to transmit resistant 
bacteria to other people (14). Patients with infections caused by antibiotic-resistant bacteria 
are more likely to have a delayed clinical recovery (15). Furthermore, antibiotic treatment 
alters the patient’s microbiota (i.e. all microorganisms that live in or on the human body), 
with potential long-term consequences and an increased risk of infection by Clostridioides 
difficile, a bacterium that can cause severe diarrhoea.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book9
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
Think D8 – before prescribing!
Before prescribing antibiotics to patients, prescribers should consider the eight Ds (Box 2.3).
Box 2.3 – Points to always consider when prescribing
Diagnose – what is the clinical diagnosis? Is there evidence of a significant bacterial infection? 
Decide – are antibiotics really needed? Do I need to take any cultures or other tests?
Drug (medicine) – which antibiotic to prescribe? Is it an Access or Watch or Reserve antibiotic? 
Are there any allergies, interactions or other contraindications?
Dose – what dose, how many times a day? Are any dose adjustments needed, for example, 
because of renal impairment?
Delivery – what formulation to use? Is this a good quality product? If intravenous treatment is 
needed, when is step down to oral delivery possible? 
Duration – for how long? What is the stop date? 
Discuss – inform the patient of the diagnosis, likely duration of symptoms, any likely medicine 
toxicity and what to do if not recovering.
Document – write down all decisions and the management plan.
Improving Access antibiotic use and reducing 
inappropriate use of oral Watch antibiotics
Key messages
• The great majority of common infections in primary health care can be treated without any 
antibiotics or with Access antibiotics.
• Reducing the inappropriate use of Watch antibiotics is key to control antibiotic resistance.
The Sixty-eighth World Health Assembly in May 2015 endorsed a global action plan to 
tackle AMR (Box 2.4) (16).
10The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
Box 2.4 – The five objectives of the global action plan
1. Improve awareness and understanding of antimicrobial resistance.
2. Strengthen surveillance and research.
3. Reduce the incidence of infection.
4. Optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines. 
5. Ensure sustainable investment in countering antimicrobial resistance
The AWaRe book therefore aims to address one of the objectives of the WHO global 
action plan “Optimize the use of antimicrobial medicines” with a focus on antibacterial 
medicines or antibiotics (antimicrobials also include antifungal, antiviral and antiprotozoal 
medicines). The AWaRe book provides guidance on when not to prescribe antibiotics and, if 
indicated, which antibiotics to prescribe for the most common infections. The AWaRe book 
focusses on the optimal use of Access antibiotics as they remain the first-choice options for 
most infections. 
The AWaRe book recommends that nine of the 10 most common infections seen 
in primary health care can be treated safely with either no antibiotics or Access antibiotics 
(Table 2.2). Only one infection, acute bloody diarrhoea (dysentery), requires the empiric 
treatment with antibiotics in the Watch category, such as ciprofloxacin or azithromycin. 
The use of oral Watch antibiotics globally is increasing. They are now very commonly 
taken by patients in primary health care for minor infections (fever/cough/diarrhoea) in both 
high-income countries and low- and middle-income countries. Reducing the inappropriate 
use of both oral and intravenous Watch antibiotics is a critical strategy for the global control 
of antibiotic resistance, while ensuring vulnerable populations have continued or, where 
appropriate, improved access to Access antibiotics.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book11
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
Table 2.2 – Common infections seen in primary health care settings and the 
antibiotic options recommended in the AWaRe book
Important
Where more than one antibiotic is recommended for an infection, they are listed in alphabetical 
order and they should be considered equal treatment options, unless otherwise indicated.
Infection ACCESS / WATCH First-choice antibiotic option (when an 
antibiotic is indicateda)
Bronchitis No antibiotic No antibiotic
Communityacquired pneumonia 
(mild cases)
 ACCESS Amoxicillin 
OR
 Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
Chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease 
exacerbations 
 ACCESS Amoxicillin 
(for most mild cases the first choice is 
symptomatic treatment and antibiotics are 
not necessary)
Dental infections ACCESS Amoxicillin 
OR
 Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
(for most cases the first choice is a dental 
procedure and antibiotics are not necessary)
Infectious diarrhoeab No antibiotic or 
 WATCH 
Most mild non-bloody diarrhoea is caused 
by viral infections and antibiotics are not 
necessary 
For acute severe bloody diarrhoea/
dysentery - Ciprofloxacin 
Otitis media ACCESS Amoxicillin 
(for most mild cases the first choice is 
symptomatic treatment and antibiotics are 
not necessary)
continues
12The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
Table 2.2 continued
Infection ACCESS / WATCH First-choice antibiotic option (when an 
antibiotic is indicateda)
Pharyngitis ACCESS Amoxicillin 
OR
 Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
(for most mild cases the first choice is 
symptomatic treatment and antibiotics are 
not necessary)
Sinusitis ACCESS Amoxicillin 
OR
 Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 
(for most mild cases the first choice is 
symptomatic treatment and antibiotics are 
not necessary)
Skin and soft tissue 
infection (mild 
cases)c
 ACCESS Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 
OR
 Cefalexin 
OR
 Cloxacillin 
Urinary tract 
infection, lower
 ACCESS Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 
OR
 Nitrofurantoin 
OR
 Sulfamethoxazole+trimethoprim 
OR
 Trimethoprim 
a The decision to treat is based on assessment of the patient and on a minimum set of criteria to start antibiotics 
described in the chapters for each infection.
b Only oral antibiotic options are reported here.
c Cloxacillin and cefalexin have a narrower spectrum of antibacterial activity compared to
amoxicillin+clavulanic acid with good efficacy in mild skin and soft tissue infections. Therefore, from an antibiotic 
stewardship perspective, these two antibiotics are the preferred options whenever possible (except for bite wounds).
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book13
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
Reducing the use of Not Recommended antibiotics
Key messages
• The wide use of fixed-dose combinations of antibiotics that are not compatible with the 
EML and not approved by the major regulatory agencies is of concern. Their use should be 
reduced as these combinations may result in increased toxicity and selection of resistance.
• WHO has developed a list of fixed-dose combinations of antibiotics whose use is strongly 
discouraged (10).
In some countries, there is substantial use of fixed-dose combinations of antibiotics, 
which contain two or more agents in a single formulation. Recent data suggest that these 
combinations represent up to 20% of global antibiotic prescribing, especially in middleincome countries (17). Some fixed-dose combinations of antibiotics are well established 
(e.g. sulfamethoxazole+trimethoprim) but other combinations often consisting of two or 
more broad-spectrum antibiotics, combined with antifungal and probiotic agents are of 
concern because they may contribute to the emergence and spread of AMR.
Improving AWaRe-ness!
Key messages
• All prescribers and dispensers have a responsibility to improve the use of antibiotics.
• Patients also have responsibilities and efforts should be made to ensure they know basic 
principles of appropriate antibiotic use (e.g. taking antibiotics as prescribed and not using 
leftover antibiotics for a later illness) and symptomatic care.
All prescribers, dispensers and users of antibiotics, including both private and public 
providers, have a clear responsibility to ensure the best use of the medicines they give or 
take. Table 2.3 outlines some of the responsibilities of these various stakeholders. The aim is 
to provide a general framework of responsibility with broad examples that could lead into a 
programme of interventions.
14The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
Table 2.3 – Responsibilities of different stakeholders for improving the use of 
antibiotics
Group Responsibility Examples of practical actions
Health care 
policymakers and 
relevant 
programme 
managers
• Discourage the unnecessary use 
of antibiotics.
• Focus on promoting the use 
of Access antibiotics where 
appropriate.
• Ensure local access to and 
availability of antibiotics in the 
national EML at the appropriate 
cost, quality and in the correct 
formulationa.
• Make sure that the national EML 
is regularly updated and aligned 
with the WHO Model Lists 
where appropriate.
• Undertake regular surveillance 
of antibiotic use at all levels, 
including by AWaRe group (e.g. 
Access/Watch ratio).
• Review national and local 
guidance documents and 
compare them with the AWaRe 
book.
• Disseminate new guidance to all 
levels of the health care services.
• Review provision of Access 
antibiotics, cost, qualityb, 
sustainability and barriers to use.
• Develop a monitoring programme 
for antibiotic use across all levels 
of health care provision, including 
the Access/Watch antibiotics ratio.
• Regularly review the national EML 
and align to the WHO Model Lists 
where synergies exist.
• Disseminate data to providers on 
antibiotic use appropriately and 
regularly.
Physicians • Be AWaRe of the AWaRe book 
and focus clinical care on D8!
 - Diagnosis – which infection
 - Decide – are antibiotics 
needed
 - Drug (medicine) – which 
antibiotic
 - Dose – at what dose
 - Delivery – what formulation
 - Duration – for how long
 - Discuss – with patient
 - Document – in the notes.
• Know which infections could 
be managed with antibiotics in 
your setting.
• Know which signs and symptoms 
would require hospital referral.
• Review national and local 
guidance documents and 
compare them with the AWaRe 
book.
• Adapt or adopt EML guidance. 
• Assist with developing and 
implementing educational 
programmes.
• Develop local tools for monitoring 
local patterns of antibiotic use and 
disseminate data appropriately 
and regularly to relevant 
stakeholders. 
• Act as local champions of the 
AWaRe book.
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book15
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
Table 2.3 continued
Group Responsibility Examples of practical actions
Pharmacists • Be AWaRe of the AWaRe book.
• Do not provide antibiotics 
without a prescription.
• Discourage self-medication with 
antibiotics.
• Monitor relative use of Access 
and Watch antibiotics. 
• Review, adapt or adopt the AWaRe 
book in line with local guidance 
documents.
• Ensure in-pharmacy availability 
of the most common infection 
chapters of the AWaRe book and 
summaries of Access and Watch 
lists. 
• Monitor local patterns of 
antibiotic use such as Access/
Watch ratios and disseminate data 
appropriately and regularly to 
relevant stakeholders.
Professional 
societies
• Be aware of AWaRe and the 
AWaRe book.
• Contribute to awareness 
campaigns. 
• Educate health care workers 
about AWaRe.
• Disseminate new guidance to all 
levels of the health care services.
Nurses • Be AWaRe of the AWaRe 
book and advise or prescribe 
accordingly.
• Review, adapt or adopt the AWaRe 
book in line with local guidance 
documents.
• Review local availability of 
antibiotics.
• Review practices and procedures 
that are non-compliant with the 
AWaRe book.
• Monitor patterns of antibiotic use.
Community 
health 
workers
• Know which infections could 
be managed with antibiotics or 
with symptomatic treatment 
alone in your setting.
• Know which signs and 
symptoms would require 
medical referral.
• Be AWaRe of the AWaRe book.
continues
16The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
Table 2.3 continued
Group Responsibility Examples of practical actions
Patients • Be aware of AWaRe.
• Avoid using leftover antibiotics.
• Avoid asking for antibiotics over 
the counter in pharmacies and 
asking physicians to prescribe 
them.
• Avoid stockpiling leftover 
antibiotics 
• Contribute to awareness 
campaigns (e.g. with family 
members and the community).
• Return any expired, unwanted 
or unused antibiotic to a 
pharmacy or health centre for 
safe disposal.
• Act as champions for the better 
use of antibiotics.
• Promote antibiotic-related 
educational activities for patients.
AWaRe: Access Watch and Reserve; EML: WHO Model Lists of Essential Medicines (8).
a This includes discouraging the excessive use of fixed-dose combinations of antibiotics.
b This includes preventing and detecting the production and use of substandard and falsified medicinal antibiotics. 
Substandard and falsified medicinal antibiotics
As antibiotics are the most common medicines used globally, the production and use of 
substandard and falsified medicinal antibiotics is a major problem. WHO estimates that up 
to one in 10 medical products in low- and middle-income country settings are substandard 
or falsified with antibiotics amongst the most commonly reported (18). These products 
are typically found in informal market settings, which are a major source of antibiotics for 
patients globally, but also in less well-regulated pharmacies. All those involved in giving 
antibiotics to patients should take all reasonable steps to ensure that good quality medicinal 
products are provided, which are registered and licensed by the relevant national medicines 
regulatory authorities. Guidance on how to identify a possible problem of substandard and 
falsified medicinal antibiotics is provided in the WHO publication: Substandard and falsified 
medical products (18). 
Community health care workers
Community health care workers include informal health care providers, that is providers 
with no or limited formal training. In rural areas in low- and middle-income country settings,
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book17
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
they are often the first medical contact for many people in the community. Antibiotics are 
commonly prescribed by these informal providers, including the inappropriate prescription 
of broad-spectrum antibiotics or frequent prescription of antibiotics to treat upper 
respiratory tract infections that are often of viral origin (19).
Improved antibiotic use could be helped by further education of this sector with a 
focus on the optimal use of Access antibiotics. Educational activities and training on how 
to manage common infections using the AWaRe book could be considered, for example, 
to decrease the use of oral Watch antibiotics and limit the use of antibiotics for severe 
infections only.
Appropriate antibiotic dosing and duration
Key messages
• Prescribers should always consult local and national dosing guidelines, where available.
• The dosing guidance provided in the AWaRe book is for the most common clinical 
infections in patients with normal kidney and liver function but the need for dose 
adjustments should always be considered.
• The guidance on duration of treatment is generally the shortest suggested duration 
for specific infections. More severe infections or patients with underlying conditions or 
immunosuppression may require longer courses of treatment than suggested in the AWaRe 
book.
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• WHO report on consensus guidance on paediatric dosing regimens for access antibiotics on 
the essential medicines list for children (20). 
For each infection discussed in the AWaRe book, guidance is given for both children and 
adults on the dose of antibiotic to be prescribed, how often the dose should be taken, the 
route of administration of the antibiotic and the duration of antibiotic treatment. 
The guidance is based on: (i) existing WHO guidelines, (ii) a review of recent literature, 
(iii) a review of recent guidelines from different WHO regions and (iv) expert opinion (the 
EML Antimicrobial Working Group). 
Users of the AWaRe book should be aware of the limited evidence underlying many 
antibiotic prescribing strategies, particularly the very poor evidence for dosing guidance for 
older antibiotics (when approval processes were less stringent and methods to determine
18The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book
pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic target attainment less developed), which may explain 
some of the variation in international recommendations. The AWaRe book therefore does not 
provide formal recommendations for dosage, frequency of use, route of administration and 
duration, but rather provides general guidance on what would be considered appropriate 
dosing strategies and duration in most clinical cases.
Dosing
Wherever appropriate the same dose is given for each antibiotic for all infections to help 
local procurement and prescribing. In the hospital facility section, guidance is also given on 
when to consider step down from intravenous to oral antibiotics, encouraging the early 
discharge of patients from hospital when clinically appropriate. 
Guidance on dose adjustments for abnormal kidney and liver function is not 
covered, and the summary of product characteristics should be consulted. In addition, 
detailed information on antibiotic administration, for example, the use of continuous or 
prolonged infusion times of beta-lactams in multidrug-resistant infections, is not covered as 
this is beyond the scope of the AWaRe book (21,22). 
Even though this dosing is not covered in the AWaRe book, higher doses or more 
frequent administration may be required in certain situations such as: patients with very 
severe infections (including sepsis / septic shock) or infections of certain body sites such as 
infections of the central nervous system; patients with significant underlying disease (e.g. 
severe immunosuppression); and overweight patients.
Dosing in children
For children, weight-based dosing was generally used for oral treatments based on WHO 
ranges. For children weighing more than 30 kg, adult dosing should be considered. The 
2019 EML report on consensus guidance on paediatric dosing regimens was used as a 
reference but adapted by infection and severity of disease (20). 
Treatment duration
For treatment duration, where there was an acceptable range for the duration of therapy, the 
lowest number of days supported by the review of guidelines and expert opinion is used. 
Strong evidence-based guidance on the most appropriate duration of treatment 
for many infections is limited. Therefore, duration is often individualized based on clinical 
response, on the success of surgical source control and, if available, changes in laboratory 
markers of infection. When an alternative diagnosis is established which does not require 
antibiotics, antibiotic treatment should be stopped. Shorter treatment where clinically 
appropriate is generally associated with less toxicity and a lower risk of selection and 
transmission of antibiotic resistance, with equivalent clinical outcomes.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book19
2. Improving the use of antibiotics with the AWaRe book 
Intravenous or oral antibiotics
Most non-severe infections can be safely treated with oral antibiotics and this approach is 
encouraged as it has several advantages, for example, less risk of line-associated infections 
and avoidance of hospitalizations. However, this is provided that there is no risk of poor 
enteral absorption (e.g. no vomiting) or need to treat pathogens for which effective oral 
options are not available, for example in the case of infections caused by certain multidrugresistant pathogens. 
When intravenous treatment is started (e.g. for severe infections), rapid oral step 
down should be considered as soon as this can be safely done.
