# TOPIC: copd_exacerbation

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease | p.178-184 | audience=general] ---
162The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
13. Exacerbation of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease
Key messages
• Antibiotics are not needed for most mild cases.
• Avoid routine sputum culture in mild cases as patients may be colonized by multiple 
bacteria, making results difficult to interpret.
• Supplementary oxygen and short-acting inhaled beta-2-agonists are the mainstay of 
treatment. Steroids are also recommended in many guidelines as they can improve lung 
function and shorten time to recovery. 
• Consider antibiotics only in severe cases requiring hospital admission. Most exacerbations 
are not due to acute bacterial infection. 
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) – fact sheet (132).
• Global surveillance, prevention and control of chronic respiratory diseases: a comprehensive 
approach (133).
• Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic (32).
• Living guidance for clinical management of COVID-19: living guidance, 23 November 2021 (33).
• Therapeutics and COVID-19: living guideline, 16 September 2022 (34).
• Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines in infants and children under 5 years of age: WHO position 
paper –February 2019 (35).
• Vaccines against influenza WHO position paper – May 2022 (37).
Definition
An exacerbation of COPD is an acute event characterized by a worsening of the patient’s 
respiratory symptoms that is beyond normal day-to-day variations and leads to a change in 
medication in patients with underlying COPD (134).
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
163
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Page 1 of 2
A cute w orsening of patient's r espirator y symptoms bey ond
normal day-to -d ay v ariations that r esults in additional therapy in
patients with underlying chr onic obstruc tiv e pulmonar y disease
(C OPD). C OPD re f ers to a gr oup of diseases that block air /g248ow and
impair br eathing and includes emph y sema and chr onic br onchitis
De/g246nition Diagnosis
Clinical Presentation
Usually not needed but can be c onsider ed in se ve re cases;
the re spirator y tr ac t of people with C OPD may be colonize d
with bac t eria (e.g ., ,,S. pneumoniae H. in/g248uenzae M. catarrhalis
P. aeruginosa S. maltophilia,) and a positiv e cultur e ma y
indicate colonization rather than acute infec tion
Microbiology Tests
C onsider C-r eac tiv e pr otein and/or pr ocalcitonin, complet e
blood count, and blood pH and gases
Other LaboratoryTests
C onsider a chest radiograph in patients r equiring
hospitalization to ex clude other diagnoses and in
outpatients if pneumonia suspec te d
Imaging
Respiratory viruses (most cases):
•I n/g248uenza virus (A and B)
•R espirator y sync ytial virus (RSV )
•P arain/g248uenza virus
•R hinovirus
•C or onavirus (including SARS -C oV -2)
•O ther r espirator y viruses
Bacteria (more rarely):
•Haemophilus in/g248uenzae
•Moraxella catarrhalis
•Streptococcus pneumoniae
•G ram-negativ e bac teria including Pseudomonas aeruginosa
(including multidrug-r esistant strains)
Most Likely Pathogens
Recommend smoking cessation, r educed indoor air pollution,
use of long-ac ting inhaled β₂-agonists (± anticholinergics) and
vaccination (e.g . against in/g248uenza, and SARS -C oV -2)S. pneumoniae
Prevention
Important: symptom s can overla p with pneumoni a
(pneumoni a mor e likely if tach yc ar d ia, tach ypnea at r est
and cr e pitations tha t persist afte r c oughing ar e pr esent)
Recent and sustained w orsening of dyspnea and cough
with incr eased sputum pr oduc tion compar ed to the
baseline in a patient with C OPD
164
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Page 2 of 2
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise indicated
Mild to Moderate Cases
Treatment
•D etails of C OPD exacerbations management ar e not
discussed her e, re fer to speci/g246c guidelines
•Supplementar y ox ygen and shor t-ac ting inhaled β₂-
agonists (± anticholinergics)
•S ystemic steroids are usually recommended (improve lung
func tion and fav our faster re cove ry )
No Antibiotic Care
Clinical Considerations
•T heir use could be consider ed in patients with dyspnea
and an incr eased v olume of purulent sputum
•I n case of fr equent exacerbations consider risk of
infec tions caused by multidrug-r esistant pathogens and
pr evious colonization of the r espirator y trac t
Antibiotics are not needed for most cases
5 days
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Severe Cases
All dosages are for normal renal function
Amo xicillin+clavulanic acid 500 mg+125 mg
q8h ORAL
Antibiotic treatment is not required in the great majority
of cases (see “Clinical Considerations" when antibiotics
may be indicated)
Do xy cy cline 100 mg q12h ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Amo xicillin 500 mg q8h ORAL
First Choice
Second Choice
C efalexin 500 mg q8h ORAL
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book165
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Pathophysiology
Exacerbations of COPD are a worsening of the existing underlying chronic inflammation 
of the respiratory tract and are caused in most cases by irritants (e.g. pollution, smoking, 
dusts and chemicals) or respiratory tract infections. Exacerbations can accelerate a decline in 
lung function (i.e. disease progression). The frequency of exacerbations of COPD is variable 
among individuals with COPD but they occur more often in cases of severe COPD (135).
Epidemiology 
According to the Global Burden of Diseases study, in 2017, there were 299 million prevalent 
cases of COPD and 3.19 million deaths caused by COPD (44,136). In 2014, more than 90% of 
deaths occurred in low- and middle-income countries (137).
COPD includes emphysema and chronic bronchitis. The most prevalent risk factor 
is exposure to tobacco smoke and indoor household air pollution (138). The incidence of 
exacerbations increases with age, especially in smokers, and mortality is higher in severe 
episodes.
Most likely pathogens
Exacerbations of COPD are triggered by viral infections in most cases when a pathogen is 
identified (Table 13.1). However, in most cases of exacerbation of COPD, no pathogen is 
identified (139,140).
Table 13.1 – Pathogens most frequently associated with exacerbations of chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease (in descending order of frequency)
Respiratory viruses (most cases) Bacteria (less frequently)
Influenza virus (A and B)
Respiratory syncytial virus
Parainfluenza virus
Rhinovirus
Coronavirus (including SARS-CoV-2)
Other respiratory viruses
Haemophilus influenzae
Moraxella catarrhalis
Streptococcus pneumoniae
Gram-negative bacteria, including 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa (including 
multidrug-resistant strains such as those 
producing ESBL and carbapenemases)
ESBL: extended-spectrum beta-lactamases; SARS-CoV-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
166The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Clinical presentation
An exacerbation of COPD should be suspected in cases of recent and sustained worsening 
of dyspnoea and cough with increased sputum production compared with the baseline of 
patients with COPD, that is, chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Symptoms can overlap with 
those of pneumonia; however, tachycardia, tachypnoea at rest and crepitations that persist 
(i.e. that do not clear) after coughing suggest pneumonia.
The decision to hospitalize a person with an exacerbation of COPD should be guided 
by the severity of symptoms, assessment of comorbidities and availability of home support.
Laboratory tests 
Patient microbiology tests
When an exacerbation of COPD is suspected clinically, sputum Gram stain and culture are 
not recommended routinely. In people with COPD, the respiratory tract may for example 
be colonized with Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Moraxella catarrhalis 
and Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and a positive culture may indicate colonization rather than 
acute infection.
Other tests
When exacerbations of COPD are suspected clinically, certain laboratory tests could be 
considered, in particular tests that can help identify patients with bacterial infections and 
that can help assess the severity of the exacerbation. The rationale is that these patients 
would benefit the most from antibiotic treatment. For example, C-reactive protein (141,142), 
procalcitonin, and complete blood count and blood gas analysis may be useful. However, 
there is no clear consensus across guidelines about which tests should be performed 
routinely in the hospital setting and such tests may not be available in many settings. 
Using microbiology surveillance data
Routine surveillance of clinical isolates from patients presenting with exacerbations of COPD 
is not helpful to inform local or national prescribing guidance. 
Imaging
A chest X-ray could be considered in patients requiring hospitalization in order to exclude 
other diagnoses (e.g. pneumonia, pulmonary oedema) or in outpatients if pneumonia is 
suspected and chest radiography is available.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book167
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
No antibiotic care
The core treatment of an exacerbation episode consists of supplementary oxygen and 
short-acting inhaled beta-2-agonists (with or without anticholinergics). Most guidelines 
currently recommend using systemic steroids because they help improve lung function and 
shorten time to recovery. 
A detailed discussion of non-antibiotic management of COPD is beyond the scope 
of this chapter. Additional information can be found on the WHO website (132).
Antibiotic treatment
Most exacerbations of COPD are not triggered by bacterial infections, therefore only certain 
cases will benefit from antibiotic treatment.
Note
Antibiotic treatment is not required in the great majority of cases of acute exacerbations of 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Antibiotics are not needed for most cases. Their use could be considered in 
severe exacerbations of COPD. Most guidelines suggest antibiotic treatment for patients 
hospitalized because of an acute exacerbation of COPD, especially if an increased volume 
and purulence of sputum is present, because these cases are more likely to be caused by 
a bacterial infection. Severe exacerbations benefit more from antibiotic treatment (see 
Table 13.2 for antibiotic options). Current evidence suggests that the benefit in terms 
of reduced short-term mortality and reduced treatment failure is limited to hospitalized 
patients in intensive care units (143). Previous colonization of the respiratory tract (e.g. 
with Pseudomonas aeruginosa ) needs to be taken into account when choosing empiric 
treatment. Patients with frequent episodes of COPD exacerbations may have received 
multiple courses of antibiotic treatment during the year and have a higher risk of infections 
caused by multidrug-resistant pathogens.
168The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
13. Exacerbation of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Table 13.2 – Empiric antibiotic treatment for exacerbation of chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease
Important
Where more than one antibiotic is recommended for an infection, they are listed in alphabetical 
order and they should be considered equal treatment options, unless otherwise indicated.
Severity First choice Second choice Total treatment 
duration
Mild to 
moderate 
cases
 Amoxicillin (oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
 Cefalexin (oral): 
500 mg given every 
8 hours
OR
 Doxycycline (oral): 
100 mg given every 
12 hours
5 days
Severe 
cases
 Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 
(oral): 500 mg + 125 mg given 
every 8 hours
– 5 days
Note. All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.
Prevention
Appropriate measures to prevent further exacerbations include smoking cessation, 
reduced indoor air pollution, use of long-acting inhaled beta-2-agonists (with or without 
anticholinergics) and vaccination against influenza, Streptococcus pneumoniae infection and 
COVID-19 (35,37). Currently, there is no clear consensus on the prophylactic use of antibiotics 
(e.g. macrolides) in patients with severe COPD and frequent episodes of exacerbation 
(144). For specific preventive measures for chronic respiratory diseases, refer to the WHO 
publication on global surveillance, prevention and control of chronic respiratory diseases 
(133).

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 5.1.2 Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) | p.406-410 | audience=general] ---
ICD10 CODE: J42-44
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a lung disease characterized by chronic obstruction of lung airflow that interferes with normal
breathing and is not fully reversible.
- The more familiar terms ‘chronic bronchitis’ and ‘emphysema’
are no longer used, but are now included within the COPD
diagnosis.
- Such a diagnosis should be considered in any patient who
- has symptoms of cough, sputum production, or dyspnea
(difficult or labored breathing), and/or a history of exposure
to risk factors for the disease.
A COPD exacerbation is an acute worsening of the patient’s respiratory
symptoms needing a change in medications.
Causes and predisposing factors
~ Tobacco smoking is the commonest cause
~ Indoor air pollution: Biomass fuel smoke (firewood, charcoal and cow dung) exposure in poorly ventilated kitchens
~ Exposure to occupational dust and chemicals (cement,
paint, saw dust, fumes) without adequate protection
~ It may frequently follow TB disease (residual symptoms)
340
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
Clinical features
~ Chronic cough in a current or previous smoker who is over
40 years
~ Breathlessness: persistent, progressive and worse with exercise +/- tight chest and wheezing
~ Chronic sputum (mucuos) production and ‘bronchitis’ for at
least 3 months in 2 successive years
~ On examination, there may be a barrel chest (increased
antero-posterior diameter)
~ Rapid breathing, reduced chest expansion, with or without
increased use of accessory muscles of respiration, rhonchi,
cyanosis
~ Decreased breath sounds, ankle swelling and other signs of
right heart failure
Differential diagnosis
~ Asthma
~ Congestive heart failure
~ Pulmonary embolism
~ Pulmonary TB
Investigation
- Spirometry: gold standard for diagnosis but if not available use
all available tools (history of exposure to risk factors + clinical
symptoms + any available investigations).
- History of exposure to risk factors
- Chest X-ray (Hyper-inflated lungs)
- Peak flometry
- Echocardiography – when one suspects right-sided heart failure
secondary to COPD
341
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
Management
~ Treatment aims at:
- Removing risk factors and preventing further damage
- Relief of symptoms and prevention of the severity and frequency
of COPD exacerbations
- Improving the patients exercise tolerance and maintaining
~ good health
~ Inhalers are the preferred formulation for the treatment of
COPD.
TREATMENT LOC
- Explain to the patient that:
- COPD is chronic lung damage and there is no
cure
- Treatment is to prevent exacerbations, further
damage, and infections
Non-pharmacological management
- Advise the patient that:
- They must stop smoking – it is the only way to
stop it from getting worse
- Reduce exposure to charcoal and wood/dung
- cooking smoke. Keep cooking areas well-
ventilated by opening windows and doors. Use
alternative clean energy sources like Biogas,
improved cooking stoves etc.
- Use masks for respiratory protection or stop
working in areas with occupational dust or
pollution
- Physical exercise to train lung capacity
- (pulmonary rehabilitation) under supervision
- Get treatment quickly in case of increased
breathlessness, cough or sputum
- Physiotherapy is beneficial to improve exercise tolerance
HC2
342
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
Step 1: Mild
- Inhaled salbutamol 2 puffs 2-4 times a day, may be used
periodically for short periods. The main purpose of this
treatment is to reduce or prevent symptoms.
If inhalers not available, consider:
- Aminophylline 200 mg twice dail
HC3
HC4
Step 2: Moderate
- Inhaled salbutamol 2 puffs 2-4 times a day
- Plus inhaled steroid beclomethasone 100-400 micrograms 2-4 times a day
HC4
Step 3: Severe
- As in step 2 plus ipratropium inhaler 2 puff 2-4 times
a day
H
Note
- If available, long acting bronchodilators salmeterol
and formeterol can be used in moderate and severe
COPD in combination with inhaled steroids
RR
COPD exacerbations
~ If more sputum, changed to more yellow/green
coloured, and/or breathlessness, temp >38°C
and or rapid breathing (“bronchitis”), then
- Treat with antibiotic e.g. amoxicillin 500 mg every 8
hours for 7-10 days or doxycycline 100 mg every 12
hours for 7-10 days
- Oral Prednisolone 40 mg once daily in the morning for
5 days. Do NOT use oral steroids for extended periods
in patients with COPD
- Refer urgently to hospital if:
- Rapid pulse (>100 beats per minute) or breathing
(>30 breaths per minute)
343
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
- Tongue or lips are “blue” (central cyanosis)
- Confused
- Failure to improve
- Give oxygen by nasal cannula (1-3 litres/min) if available,
target SpO2 88-92%
Note
- Give oxygen with care (minimum flow required to reach the
target SpO2) because COPD patients are at risk of hypercapnia
(CO2 retention) which cause respiratory depression and coma
