# TOPIC: intraabdominal_diverticulitis

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 32. Intra-abdominal infections - acute diverticulitis | p.470-479 | audience=general] ---
454The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 HOSPITAL FACILITY
32. Intra-abdominal infections – 
acute diverticulitis
Key messages
• Uncomplicated cases (without peritonitis or abscess) in an immunocompetent patient are 
usually self-limiting and do not require antibiotic treatment.
• Complicated cases and cases in immunocompromised patients need treatment based on 
severity of symptoms (mild or severe) with broader-spectrum agents for severe cases.
• Treatment should also be active against anaerobes as these pathogens are often involved in 
intra-abdominal infections.
• In complicated cases, treatment with 4 days of antibiotics is sufficient once primary source 
control is achieved surgically.
Definition
Acute diverticulitis is the acute inflammation of diverticula (sac-like protrusions of the wall 
of the colon) that can cause severe abdominal pain. Acute diverticulitis is usually classified as 
uncomplicated when there is no involvement of the peritoneal cavity and the inflammation 
is localized to the diverticula, for example, no perforation, no abscess, no diffuse peritonitis. 
When the inflammation extends to the peritoneal cavity or when an abscess is present, the 
condition is considered complicated.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
455
HOSPITAL FACILITY 
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Acute diverticulitis
Intra-abdominal infection • Page 1 of 2
Diagnosis
Clinical Presentation
•A cute pain in the left or right low er abdominal quadrants
with chills , nausea and v omiting; fev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) may be
absen t
•L eft div er ticulitis is mor e common in Eur ope and Nor th
America, right div er ticulitis in Asia
Mild cases: Not usually needed
Severe cases:
•Blood cultur es (ideally befor e star ting antibiotics)
•M icr oscopy and cultur e of abscess /g248uid material (if this
can be drained) to adjust empiric antibiotic tr eatmen t
Microbiology Tests
•Determine disease severity and help identify a
bacterial infection:W hite blood cell count, C-r eac tiv e
pr otein and/or pr ocalcitonin
•I f sepsis is suspec ted consider additional laborator y tests
(see sepsis infographic)(see sepsis infographic)
Other LaboratoryTests
Abdominal ultrasound or CT of the abdomen (depending
on availability) to con/g246rm the diagnosis
Imaging
Bacteria:
•E nterobacterales (mostly including multidrug-Escherichia coli
r esistant strains)
• spp . (e .g . of the group)Streptococcus S. anginosus
• spp .Enterococcus
•A naer obes (mostly spp .)Bacteroides
Fungi (consider if recent course of antibiotics):
•M ostly Candida albicans
Parasites (consider in endemic settings):
• (pin w orm)Enterobius vermicularis
Most Likely Pathogens
Treatment (Section 1 of 2)
Clinical Considerations
Important:
•C onsider peritonitis if sev er e pain, diffuse r ebound
tenderness upon sudden r elease of pr essur e on the
abdomen and abdominal muscular tensing
•H ypotension and signs of organ h ypoper fusion (e .g .
r educed urine output) ar e potential signs of sepsis
/septic shock that need urgent tr eatmen t
Important:
•Simplify empiric tr eatment to a mor e narr owspec trum antibiotic based on cultur e r esults or rapid
clinical impr ovement if culture results unavailable
•Step down to oral treatment is based on
impr ovement of symptoms, signs of infec tion and the
ability to take oral antibiotics
•If signs and symptoms persist, abdominal imaging
is suggested , or an alternativ e ex tra-abdominal sour ce
of infec tion should be consider ed
Empiric antibiotic treatment should be guided by:
The sev erity of symptoms , considering local pr evalence of
r esistance (par ticularly of isolates of Enter obac terales
pr oducing ESBL) and individual risk fac tors for r esistan t
pathogens
•Uncomplicated cases in immunocompetent
patients not: antibiotics needed if ther e ar e no
systemic signs of infec tion; if these cases do not
r esolv e spontaneously after 2-3 days , consider
antibiotics
•Uncomplicated cases in severely
immunocompromised patients: tr eat with
antibiotics alone (if close follow up possible)
•: tr eat with antibiotics andComplicated cases
surgical sour ce control (e.g . drainage of large
abscesses >5 cm or colonic r esec tion)
A cute in/g248ammation of div er ticula (sac-like pr otrusions of the
wall of the colon) that can cause sev er e abdominal pain
De/g246nition
Classi/g246cation based on complexity:
•: No in v olv ement of peritoneal cavity andUncomplicated
no abscess
•: In v olv ement of the peritoneal cavity and/orComplicated
abscess
Classi/g246cation based on severity:
•: Not critically ill with no signs of sepsis or septic shockMild
•: Critically ill with signs of sepsis or septic shockSevere
456
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 HOSPITAL FACILITY
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Acute diverticulitis
Intra-abdominal infection • Page 2 of 2
Treatment (Section 2 of 2)
•Most mild cases do not need antibiotic treatment
•: (if goodTreatment with antibiotics alone 4 days
clinical recovery and symptoms resolved)
•:Treatment with antibiotics & surgical source control
Stop after adequate source control (surgery) is4 days
achieved otherwise, continue until clinically stable and
afebrile
Antibiotic Treatment Duration Mild Cases
Most mild cases do not need antibiotic treatment
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise indicated
First Choice
Severe Cases
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise indicated
----------------------------- -----------------------------OR
Cefotaxime 2 g q8h IV
Ceftriaxone 2 g q24h IV
---------------------- ----------------------COMBINED WITH
Metronidazole 500 mg q8h IV/ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Piperacillin+tazobactam 4 g + 500 mg q6h IV
Second Choice
Meropenem 1 g q8h IV
Consider meropenem only in complicated cases if there is a
high risk of infection with ESBL-producing Enterobacterales
Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 875 mg + 125 mg
ACCESS q8h ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
First Choice
----------------------------- -----------------------------OR
Cefotaxime 2 g q8h IV
Ceftriaxone 2 g q24h IV
---------------------- ----------------------COMBINED WITH
Metronidazole 500 mg q8h IV/ORAL
---------------------- ----------------------COMBINED WITH
Metronidazole 500 mg q8h IV/ORAL
Cipro/g248oxacin 500 mg q12h ORAL
Second Choice
Metronidazole has excellent oral bioavailability and the IV
route should be reserved for patients with impaired
gastrointestinal function
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book457
HOSPITAL FACILITY 
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Pathophysiology
In cases of acute diverticulitis, the first step in the pathogenesis is the formation of diverticula 
(i.e. diverticulosis). Diverticula are sac-like protrusions of the colonic wall. The mechanism 
leading to diverticulitis of the colon is the erosion of the wall of the diverticula by increased 
intraluminal pressure. If bacterial contamination and chemical irritation (usually due to 
leakage of sterile fluids that are irritants to the peritoneum; for example, bile or blood) 
of the peritoneal cavity occur, peritonitis develops. Intra-abdominal abscesses (i.e. the 
presence of a collection of infected fluid in the peritoneal cavity) can also form as a result of 
a complicated diverticulitis.
Epidemiology 
Acute diverticulitis is common in high-income countries and mostly affects adults older 
than 50 years; its incidence increases with age. The condition is less frequent in many 
low- and middle-income countries, probably because of differences in the fibre content of 
diets. The overall risk of developing acute diverticulitis in patients with diverticulosis is low 
(324,325) and most cases (> 80%) are uncomplicated. Nonetheless, acute diverticulitis is still 
a common cause of colonic resection (326).
Most likely pathogens
The most common pathogens involved in acute diverticulitis are Gram-negative bacilli and 
anaerobic bacteria from the intestinal microbiota (Table 32.1). Infections are often caused 
by more than one pathogen and may include fungal pathogens, especially in patients pretreated with antibiotics. Certain parasites need to be considered in the differential diagnosis 
of abdominal pain in endemic settings.
458The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 HOSPITAL FACILITY
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Table 32.1 – Pathogens most frequently associated with acute diverticulitis (in 
descending order of frequency)
Bacteria Fungi Parasites
Enterobacterales (mostly Escherichia coli) and other 
Gram-negative bacteria such as Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa and Acinetobacter baumannii (including 
multidrug-resistant strains such as those producing 
ESBL and carbapenemases)
Streptococcus spp. (e.g. of the Streptococcus 
anginosus group – old name: Streptococcus milleri) 
Enterococcus spp. 
Anaerobes (mostly Bacteroides spp.)
Mostly Candida 
albicans
Enterobius 
vermicularis 
(pinworm)
ESBL: extended spectrum beta-lactamases.
Clinical presentation
Acute diverticulitis should be considered as a possible diagnosis in all cases of acute pain in 
the left lower abdominal quadrant. It should be noted that while left lower diverticulitis is 
more prevalent in European countries and North America, right lower diverticulitis is more 
common in Asia.
Fever (≥ 38.0 °C), chills, nausea and vomiting may be present, mostly in complicated 
diverticulitis. Severe pain, diffuse rebound tenderness on sudden release of pressure on 
the abdomen and abdominal muscular defence are usually present in cases of peritonitis. 
Hypotension and signs of organ hypoperfusion (e.g. reduced urine output) can be present 
in cases of organ failure and are a medical and /or surgical emergency. Please also refer to 
the chapter on sepsis if suspected.
Laboratory tests 
Patient microbiology tests
In mild cases, routine microbiology tests are not usually needed and basing antibiotic 
treatment on pathogens cultured from the abdominal cavity at the time of operation is not 
recommended. Certain microbiology tests (Table 32.2) could be considered in severely ill 
patients to adjust empiric antibiotic treatment once the results of antibiotic susceptibility 
tests are available.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book459
HOSPITAL FACILITY 
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Table 32.2 – Microbiology tests to consider in severe cases as indicated in the EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Blood cultures 
and antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing
To detect bacterial bloodstream 
infections
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Microscopy, culture 
and antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing of 
abscess fluid material 
when this can be drained
First step to detect and identify 
bacterial and fungal species 
for selection of appropriate 
antimicrobial regimens
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics.
Other tests
Laboratory tests can be used to complement the clinical examination and medical history. 
Based on availability, Table 32.3 indicates several tests that could be considered in the 
patient’s initial assessment and to help guide the duration of antibiotic treatment.
Table 32.3 – Laboratory tests (other than microbiology) that may help assess the 
severity of disease and the identification of a bacterial infection as indicated in the 
WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
White blood cell count To help in the diagnosis of 
infections
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
C-reactive protein To detect inflammation as an 
indicator of various conditions (e.g. 
sepsis)a
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Procalcitonin To guide antibiotic therapy or 
discontinuation in sepsis
Only in tertiary care 
facilities
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics.
a A cut-off value of 150–170 mg/L for C-reactive protein is sometimes used to discriminate between mild/
uncomplicated cases and severe/complicated cases (327,328).
460The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 HOSPITAL FACILITY
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Using microbiology surveillance data
Routine surveillance of pathogens cultured from the abdominal cavity is not recommended.
Empiric guidance given by the AWaRe book could be reviewed and adapted based 
on local clinically relevant microbiology surveillance data. For example, clinically relevant 
isolates for this infection would be blood culture data from patients on surgical wards with 
intra-abdominal infections. 
Imaging
Imaging is helpful to confirm acute diverticulitis. In settings where CT scanning is available, 
a scan of the abdomen is the best imaging method to confirm acute diverticulitis and grade 
its severity. However, because ultrasound is more widely available, abdominal ultrasound 
can also be considered a valid alternative.
Treatment 
Complicated cases
Patients with suspected or confirmed complicated acute diverticulitis or with recurrent 
attacks should be promptly referred for surgical consultation. 
Uncomplicated cases 
In immunocompetent patients with uncomplicated diverticulitis (i.e. localized diverticular 
inflammation) and no signs of systemic inflammation, antibiotic treatment is usually not 
needed. In these patients, uncomplicated diverticulitis can be considered a self-limiting 
condition where antibiotics do not offer a benefit in terms of clinical resolution and 
recurrence (329,330).
Antibiotic treatment 
In patients with complicated acute diverticulitis or in uncomplicated cases requiring antibiotic 
treatment (e.g. cases that did not resolve spontaneously after 2–3 days without antibiotic 
treatment) or in severely immunocompromised patients, empiric antibiotic treatment should 
be chosen based on the severity of symptoms (mild or severe). It is important to take into 
account local prevalence of resistance, particularly isolates of Enterobacterales producing 
ESBLs, since the prevalence can vary greatly among settings (Table 32.4). Individual risk 
factors for resistant pathogens (e.g. recent antibiotic treatment, colonization with resistant
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book461
HOSPITAL FACILITY 
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
pathogens) should also be considered. In settings where resistance to carbapenems is 
highly prevalent, alternative antibiotic options including Reserve antibiotics – see chapter 
on Reserve antibiotics – could be considered in severely ill patients who are deteriorating. 
In complicated cases (i.e. presence of perforation or abscess), empiric antibiotic treatment 
should be started as soon as the diagnosis is suspected and could be stopped 4 days after 
control of the source of infection is achieved provided there is good clinical recovery. 
Patients with small abscesses (< 5 cm) or pericolic gas are usually treated with 
systemic antibiotic treatment alone provided close clinical follow up is possible and there is 
a good clinical response and symptoms have resolved (331).
In patients with large abscesses (e.g. percutaneous drainage of abscesses > 5 cm) 
and patients with peritonitis, control of the source of infection (e.g. colonic resection), in 
addition to systemic antibiotic treatment, is needed. 
Simplify empiric treatment to a more narrow-spectrum antibiotic (often also called 
de-escalation) based on culture results (targeted treatment) or based on rapid clinical 
improvement when no microbiology test results are available.
Step-down to oral treatment is based on improvement of symptoms and signs 
of infection and the ability to take oral antibiotics allowing discharge of the patient home 
when clinically appropriate.
If signs and symptoms persist, abdominal imaging is suggested, or an alternative 
extra-abdominal source of infection should be considered.
462The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 HOSPITAL FACILITY
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Table 32.4 – Empiric antibiotic treatment for acute diverticulitis
Note
Mild cases are defined as patients who are not critically ill with no signs of sepsis or septic shock. 
Severe cases are defined as patients who are critically ill with signs of sepsis or septic shock.
Important
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order but they should all be considered equal treatment 
options, unless otherwise indicated.
Severity Adults Total treatment 
duration
Mild cases
These can be 
uncomplicated cases 
that did not resolve 
spontaneously after 2–3 
days without antibiotics 
or complicated cases with 
mild symptoms.
First choice 
 Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 
IV: 1 g + 200 mg given every 8 hours
Oral: 875 + 125 mg given every 8 hours 
OR 
 Cefotaxime (IV): 2 g given every 8 hours
AND Metronidazole (IV/oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR 
 Ceftriaxone (IV): 2 g given once a day
AND Metronidazole (IV/oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
Second choice 
 Ciprofloxacin a (oral): 500 mg given 
every 12 hours AND 
 Metronidazole (IV/oral): 500 mg given 
every 8 hours
(Ciprofloxacin and metronidazole have 
excellent oral bioavailability and the IV 
route should be reserved for patients 
with impaired gastrointestinal function.)
Continue for 4 days 
after control of the 
source of infection is 
achieved provided 
that there is good 
clinical recovery.
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book463
HOSPITAL FACILITY 
32. Intra-abdominal infections – acute diverticulitis
Table 32.4 continued
Severity Adults Total treatment 
duration
Severe cases First choice 
 Cefotaxime (IV): 2 g given every 8 hours
AND Metronidazole (IV/oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR 
 Ceftriaxone (IV): 2 g given once a day
AND Metronidazole (IV/oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR 
 Piperacillin+tazobactam b (IV): 4 g + 
500 mg given every 6 hours
Second choice 
 Meropenem c (IV): 1 g given every 
8 hours
Continue for 4 days 
after control of the 
source of infection is 
achieved provided 
that there is good 
clinical recovery.
EML: Model List of Essential Medicines; IV: intravenous.
Note: All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
a The use of fluoroquinolones (such as ciprofloxacin) can be associated with important side-effects including: (i) 
mental health disturbances such as disorientation, agitation, nervousness, memory impairment and delirium; (ii) 
serious blood sugar disturbances such as hypoglycaemic coma; (iii) increased risk of tendinitis and tendon rupture; 
(iv) worsening symptoms in those with myasthenia gravis; and (v) potential irreversible neuropathy (serious nerve 
damage).
b Of note, piperacillin+tazobactam offers anti- Enterococcus coverage, which the other options listed for adults do 
not. Ampicillin would be another appropriate option, but it was not listed in this table as it is not currently in the 
EML for this indication, while it is listed for children.
c Meropenem should not be considered for routine use for all severe cases but only in complicated cases (i.e. 
abscess and/or peritonitis) in settings with a high prevalence of extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing 
Enterobacterales or in patients with known prior colonization, treated with multiple antibiotic courses or at risk of 
infections with pathogens resistant to the first choice option. Empiric use of a Reserve antibiotic could be considered 
exceptionally in very select cases of seriously ill patients failing to respond to carbapenems or who have previously 
been treated for infections caused by carbapenem-resistant pathogens or who are known to be colonized with 
multidrug-resistant Gram-negative bacteria known to be susceptible to the selected Reserve antibiotic. Please refer 
to the chapter on Reserve antibiotics for the definition and list of Reserve antibiotics included in the WHO EML.
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.
