# TOPIC: pharyngitis

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 6. Pharyngitis | p.62-76 | audience=general] ---
46The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
Key messages
• Antibiotics are not needed for most cases since most cases are self-limiting and of viral 
origin. 
• Pharyngitis (sore throat) is a very common condition and one of the main causes of 
antibiotic overuse in primary health care.
• In bacterial pharyngitis, antibiotic treatment only reduces sore throat pain for around 1 day.
• Cases caused by Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus) can very rarely be 
complicated by, for example, rheumatic fever, rheumatic heart disease and acute 
glomerulonephritis.
• The only clear indication for antibiotic treatment of pharyngitis is to reduce the probability 
of developing rheumatic fever in endemic settings. 
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Pocket book of hospital care for children: guidelines for the management of common 
childhood illnesses, 2013 (31).
• Rheumatic heart disease – fact sheet (52).
• Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease: report of a WHO expert consultation, Geneva, 
20 October–1 November 2001 (53).
• Diphtheria vaccine: WHO position paper – August 2017 (54).
Definition
Pharyngitis is commonly defined as an inflammation of the pharynx characterized by sore 
throat and painful swallowing.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
47
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
Pharyngitis
Page 1 of 2
In /g248ammation of the phar ynx charac terized by sor e thr oat and
painful swallowing
De/g246nition
Most Likely Pathogens
Diagnosis
Microbiology Tests
Blood tests usually not needed
Other LaboratoryTests
Usually not needed unless a complication is suspec te d
Imaging
Clinical Presentation
Low likelihood of Group A (GAS)Streptococcus
(Centor score 0-2):
•T ests usually not needed
Higher likelihood of GAS (Centor score 3-4):
•R apid antigen test or thr oat cultur e could be consider ed ,
especially in countries wher e rheumatic fev er (RF) and
rheumatic hear t disease ar e fr equen t
•T ests should only be per formed if antibiotic tr eatment is
consider ed following a positiv e test r esult
Sor e thr oat and painful swallowing
• : Symptoms ar e often the same as those of a viralViral
upper r espirator y trac t infec tion (URTI) with cough,
headache and m yalgia
• : Mor e sev er e pr esentation, fev er (≥38.0 °C ),Bacterial
tender cer vical lymph nodes and phar yngeal exudates (see
"Centor Clinical Scoring System" )
Bacteria:
•G r oup A (5-10% in adults)Streptococcus
•S tr eptococci (gr oup C and G)
Other infectious causes:
•A cute HIV -infec tion and other sexually transmitted diseases
(syphilis , gonorrhea)
•A cute t ox oplasmosis
•D iphtheria
Non infectious (rare):
•P ollution
•A llergens
•Smok ing
Viruses (> 80% of cases):
•R espirator y viruses (most cases)
•Epstein Barr virus (rar ely)
48
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
Pharyngitis
Page 2 of 2
Centor Clinical Scoring System
Treatment
Depending on the local prevalence or previous history of
rheumatic fever:
•Low Risk of RF: 5 days
•High Risk of RF: 10 days
Note: when clarithromycin or cefalexin are used treatment
duration is always 5 days
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Medicines are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options
Symptomatic Treatment
Ibuprofen 200-400 mg q6-8h (Max 2.4 g/day)
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Paracetamol (acetaminophen) 500 mg-1 g
q4-6h (max 4 g/day)
•: Max 2 g/dayHepatic impairment/cirrhosis
Signs & Symptoms
(1 point each)
/c162Fever > 38.0 °C
/c162No cough
/c162Tender anterior cervical
lymphadenitis
/c162Tonsillar exudates
Score 0-2
•GAS pharyngitis unlikely
•Symptomatic treatment only
Score 3-4 - In case of low risk of RF (e.g.
countries with prevalence of RF)low
•Antibiotic treatment can be withheld
even in cases of likely GAS pharyngitis
Score 3-4 - In case of high risk of RF (e.g.
countries with prevalence of RF)med/high
•Antibiotic treatment recommended
•This system can help indicate infection
origin (bacterial or viral) and whether
antibiotics are necessary
•However even with a score of 4, the
probability of GAS infection is only 50% and
this score has only been validated in highincome settings
Antibiotic Treatment
The only clear indication for antibiotic treatment is to
reduce the probability of developing rheumatic fever in
endemic settings (however, after 21 years of age the risk
of RF is lower)
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise
indicated
First Choice
Second Choice
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Amoxicillin 500 mg q8h ORAL
Phenoxymethylpenicillin( as potassium) 500 mg
(800 000 IU)q 6h ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Cefalexin 500 mg q8h ORAL
Clarithromycin 500 mg q12h ORAL
GAS remains universally susceptible to penicillin.
However, resistance to macrolides is common in some
communities
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
49
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
Pharyngitis
Page 1 of 2
In /g248ammation of the phar ynx charac terized by sor e thr oat and
painful swallowing
De/g246nition Diagnosis
Microbiology Tests
Blood tests usually not needed
Other LaboratoryTests
Usually not needed unless a complication is suspec te d
Imaging
Clinical Presentation
Most Likely Pathogens
Viruses (> 80% of cases):
•R espirator y viruses (most cases)
•E pstein Barr virus
Bacteria:
•G r oup A (20-30% in childr en)Streptococcus
•S tr eptococci (gr oup C and G)
Other infectious causes:
•A cute t ox oplasmosis
•D iphtheria
Non infectious (rare):
•P ollution
•A llergens
•Smok ing
Sor e thr oat and painful swallowing
• : Symptoms ar e often the same as those of a viralViral
upper r espirator y trac t infec tion (URTI) with cough,
headache and m yalgia
• : Mor e sev er e pr esentation, fev er (≥38.0 °C ),Bacterial
tender cer vical lymph nodes and phar yngeal exudate s
Lower likelihood to be caused by Group A Streptococcus
(GAS) (Centor score 0-2):
•T ests usually not needed
Higher likelihood to be caused by GAS (Centors core 3-4):
•R apid antigen test or thr oat cultur e could be consider ed ,
especially in countries wher e rheumatic fev er (RF) and
rheumatic hear t disease ar e fr equen t
•Negativ e rapid antigen test could be con/g246rmed with a
thr oat cultur e if available
50
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
Pharyngitis
Page 2 of 2
Centor Clinical Scoring System
Treatment
Depending on the local pr evalence or pr evious histor y of
rheumatic fe ve r:
•L ow R isk of RF : 5 days
•H igh Risk of RF : 10 days
Note: when clarithromycin or cefalexin are used treatment
duration is always 5 days
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Signs & Symptoms
(1 point each)
/c162Fe ve r > 38.0 °C
/c162No cough
/c162T ender anterior cer vical
lymphadenitis
/c162T onsillar exudate s
Symptomatic Treatment
Medicines are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Ibupr ofen (do not use if <3 months of age)
•: 5-10 mg/kg q6-8hPain control/antipyretic
•:Oral weight bands
6-<10 kg 50 mg q8h
10-<15 kg 100 mg q8h
15-<20 kg 150 mg q8h
20-<30 kg 200 mg q8h
≥30 kg 200-400 mg q6-8h
(Max 2.4 g/day)
Pa racetamol (acetaminophen)
•: 10-15 mg/kg q6 hPain control/antipyretic
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 60 mg q6h
6-<10 kg 100 mg q6h
10-<15 kg 150 mg q6h
15-<20 kg 200 mg q6h
20-<30 kg 300 mg q6h
≥30 kg 500 mg-1 g q4-6h
(Max 4 g/day or 2 g/day if
hepatic impairment/cirrhosis)
•T his system can help indicate infec tion
origin (bac terial or viral) and whether
antibiotics ar e necessar y
•H owever even with a score of 4, the
pr obability of GAS infec tion is only 50% and
this scor e has only been validated in highincome settings
Score 0-2
•GAS phar yngitis unlikely
•Symptomatic treatment only
Score 3-4 - In case of low risk of RF (e .g .
countries with pr evalence of RF)low
•Antibiotic treatment can be withheld
ev en in cases of likely GAS phar yngitis
Score 3-4 - In case of high risk of RF (e .g .
countries with pr evalence of RF)med/high
•A ntibiotic tr eatment re commended
Antibiotic Treatment
The only clear indication for antibiotic treatment is to
reduce the probability of developing rheumatic fever in
endemic settings
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise indicated
Amo xicillin 80-90 mg/kg/da y ORAL
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 250 mg q12h
6-<10 kg 375 mg q12h
10-<15 kg 500 mg q12h
15-<20 kg 750 mg q12h
≥20 kg 500 mg q8h or 1 g q12h
First Choice
Pheno xy meth ylpenicillin (as potassium):
10-15 mg/kg/dose (16 000-24 000 IU/kg/dose)
q6-8h ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
C efalexin 25 mg/kg/dose q12h ORAL
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 125 mg q12h
6-<10 kg 250 mg q12h
10-<15 kg 375 mg q12h
15-<20 kg 500 mg q12h
20-<30 kg 625 mg q12h
≥30 kg 500 mg q8h
Second Choice
Clarithr om y cin 7.5 mg/kg/dose q12h ORAL
GAS remains universally susceptible to penicillin.
However, resistance to macrolides is common in some
communities
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book51
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
Pathophysiology
Viruses and bacteria responsible for pharyngitis gain access to the mucosal cells of the 
pharynx through different mechanisms and start replicating in these cells. Damage is 
caused to the cells where pathogens are replicating.
Epidemiology 
Sore throat is one of the most common conditions in patients presenting to primary health 
care and remains a very frequent cause of inappropriate antibiotic prescribing. Up to 60% of 
patients with sore throat are given antibiotics in many high-income outpatient settings (55,56).
Incidence and prevalence data on sore throat are unavailable for most low- and 
middle-income country settings. Most cases of pharyngitis are self-limiting and of viral 
origin. Cases of sore throat caused by bacteria (mostly Streptococcus pyogenes) are rare and 
were responsible for about 10% of cases among patients with sore throat of all ages in a 
meta-analysis, but severe complications can occur (57). These complications are either due 
to invasion of the organism in the pharynx (e.g. suppurative complications such as quinsy) 
or to an abnormal immunological response (e.g. acute rheumatic fever) (58,59). Suppurative 
complications occur in a very small number of cases, are difficult to predict and most can be 
readily treated (60,61). For this reason, the prevention of suppurative complications should 
not be considered an indication for antibiotic treatment in sore throat.
Rheumatic fever is also a rare complication due to an autoimmune inflammatory 
reaction to untreated streptococcal pharyngitis; usually less than 3% of untreated cases of 
pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus pyogenes trigger rheumatic fever in settings where this 
condition is endemic (53,62). The incidence of rheumatic fever peaks between 5 and 15 
years of age and is rare in people older than 30 years. 
When rheumatic fever develops, it usually presents (70–75% of cases) as an acute 
febrile illness with joint manifestations (e.g. pain or tenderness) and carditis. Less frequently, 
rheumatic fever can present as a predominantly neurological and/or behavioural disorder. 
Symptoms usually develop 2–3 weeks after the initial symptoms of pharyngitis are evident. 
Ultimately, rheumatic fever can result in damage to the heart valves (rheumatic heart 
disease). About 60% of people with rheumatic fever will develop rheumatic heart disease 
and the risk is two times higher for females than males.
Despite the lack of data from many countries, 30 million people worldwide are thought 
to be affected by rheumatic heart disease, with an estimated 320 000 deaths in 2015 (63).
Cases of rheumatic fever are concentrated in the WHO African, South-East Asian and 
Western Pacific regions; these regions account for about 84% of cases. With 27% of all cases 
of rheumatic fever in 2015 India has the highest burden worldwide (53).
52The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
Most likely pathogens
Most (> 80%) cases of pharyngitis are caused by a viral infection (respiratory viruses have 
been identified in 25–45% of cases; less frequently, the Epstein–Barr virus or other viruses 
of the herpesvirus family or SARS-CoV-2 are the cause). A minority of cases of pharyngitis 
are caused by bacteria, mainly Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus). Other 
streptococci (group C and G) have also been implicated as causes of pharyngitis (Table 6.1). 
Other infectious causes that need to be considered are acute human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV) infection and other sexually transmitted infections (STIs) such as syphilis and 
gonorrhoea, acute toxoplasmosis and diphtheria – consider diphtheria if fever and greyishwhite membranes covering the tonsil(s) are present in a child not vaccinated against 
diphtheria. Rarely, the cause of pharyngitis is non-infectious, for example, exposure to 
pollution, allergens and smoking.
Table 6.1 – Pathogens most frequently associated with pharyngitis (in descending 
order of frequency)
Viruses (most cases) Bacteria (rarely)
Respiratory syncytial virus 
Rhinovirus 
Coronavirus (including SARS-CoV-2)
Influenza virus (A and B)
Other respiratory viruses
Other viruses (rarely)
Epstein–Barr virus
HIV
Streptococcus pyogenes (group A Streptococcus)
Group C Streptococcus
Group G Streptococcus
Treponema pallidum
Neisseria gonorrhoeae
HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; SARS-CoV-2: severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2.
Pharyngitis caused by antibiotic-resistant pathogens
Streptococcus pyogenes is still universally very susceptible to penicillin. Resistance to 
penicillin has never been reported and there is no evidence of increasing minimal inhibitory 
concentrations. However, resistance to macrolides is common in some settings. 
Clinical presentation
Pharyngitis is characterized by sore throat and painful swallowing. Typical accompanying 
signs and symptoms can vary depending on the etiology. If the cause is viral, symptoms
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book53
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
match those of a viral upper respiratory tract infection, and cough, headache and myalgia 
are likely to be present. If the cause is bacterial, a more severe presentation is usually seen, 
with fever (≥ 38.0 °C), tender cervical lymph nodes and pharyngeal exudates. Several 
clinical scoring systems have been developed to identify patients with higher likelihood of 
pharyngitis being caused by Streptococcus pyogenes (see the next section).
Scoring symptoms of pharyngitis
The specific cause of pharyngitis may be difficult to recognize based on symptoms alone. 
Scoring systems can help differentiate a viral infection from one of bacterial origin. The 
rationale is to help health care workers standardize the therapeutic approach and decide 
whether antibiotic treatment could be given based on the most likely etiology. However, 
scoring systems have a low specificity (i.e. high risk of incorrectly identifying patients with 
viral pharyngitis as having a Streptococcus pyogenes infection) and can lead to unnecessary 
antibiotic treatment. Moreover, most systems have only been validated in high-income 
settings. 
One of the most widely used systems in the adult population is the Centor clinical 
scoring system (Table 6.2). However, even with the highest score of 4, the probability of an 
infection caused by Streptococcus pyogenes is only 50% (64).
In low- and middle-income countries, other scores could be considered that have 
been specifically validated in these settings (65).
Table 6.2 – Centor score for the clinical assessment of pharyngitis
Relevant signs and symptoms Points
Fever > 38.0 °C 1
No cough 1
Tender anterior cervical lymphadenitis 1
Tonsillar exudates 1
Total score Likelihood of Streptococcus pyogenes infection (%)
0 1–2.5
1 5–10
2 11–17
3 28–35
continues
54The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
Table 6.2 continued
4 51–53
Centor score 0 – 1 – 2 • Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis unlikely 
• Give symptomatic treatment only
Centor score 3 – 4 • Score suggestive of Streptococcus pyogenes 
pharyngitis
• In countries with a low prevalence of rheumatic 
fever, antibiotic treatment can be withheld 
even in cases of likely Streptococcus pyogenes 
pharyngitis
• In countries with medium to high prevalence 
of rheumatic fever, antibiotic treatment is 
recommended as it reduces the likelihood of 
developing rheumatic fever by around two thirds. 
Laboratory tests 
Patient microbiology tests
The choice of whether microbiological tests are helpful and which to consider is based on 
the likelihood of Streptococcus pyogenes infection. In many settings no tests are routinely 
available. The rationale for identifying cases caused by Streptococcus pyogenes is that those 
are the cases that may benefit the most from antibiotic treatment in certain settings (mostly 
to prevent rheumatic fever). In general, most guidelines prefer rapid antigen tests to cultures 
because they give results more quickly. Table 6.3 summarizes the microbiology tests that 
could be considered to diagnose pharyngitis.
Table 6.3 – Microbiology tests that could be considered if available for the 
diagnosis of pharyngitis as indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Group A 
Streptococcus 
antigena (RDT)
To aid in the diagnosis of Group A 
streptococcal pharyngitis
Community settings and health 
facilities without laboratoriesb
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book55
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
Table 6.3 continued
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Throat culture First step in detection and 
identification of bacterial species 
for selection of appropriate 
antibiotic regimens
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics; RDT: rapid diagnostic test.
a Possible specimens include: throat swabs.
b Community and health settings without laboratories are settings such as health posts and centres, doctors’ offices, 
outreach clinics, ambulatory care. These tests are also assumed to be available at health care facilities with laboratories.
In the case of a low likelihood of Streptococcus pyogenes as the causative pathogen 
(i.e. a Centor score of 0 to 2; see Table 6.2), rapid antigen test or throat culture are not usually 
needed.
In the case of a higher likelihood of Streptococcus pyogenes as the causative 
pathogen (i.e. Centor score 3–4), rapid antigen test or throat culture could be considered, 
especially in countries where rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease are important 
problems. (Note: WHO recommends the use of a rapid antigen test as part of the strategy 
for primary prevention of rheumatic fever through the effective treatment of streptococcal 
pharyngitis (53)). 
In children and adolescents with a Centor score of 3 or 4, a negative rapid antigen 
test could be confirmed with a throat culture if available.
Other tests
When pharyngitis is suspected, blood tests are not usually needed unless a complication is 
thought to be present.
Using microbiology surveillance data
As amoxicillin or penicillin are the recommended first line treatment and Streptococcus 
pyogenes is still universally very susceptible to these antibiotics, there is no role for routine 
surveillance to inform empiric guidance.
Imaging
When pharyngitis is thought to be the cause of clinical symptoms, imaging is usually not 
required unless a complication is suspected.
56The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
No antibiotic care
Most cases of pharyngitis are of viral origin and do not benefit from antibiotics. In most 
cases, including those of bacterial origin, symptoms resolve within a week. Symptomatic 
treatment with oral analgesics and/or antipyretics, such as paracetamol and/or ibuprofen 
(Table 6.4) may be helpful.
Table 6.4 – Medicines to consider for pain control of pharyngitis 
Important
Medicines are listed in alphabetical order and they should all be considered equal treatment options.
Medicine Formulation Dose and frequency
Ibuprofena Oral liquid: 200 mg/5 mL
Tablet: 200 mg; 400 mg; 
600 mg
Adults: 200–400 mg given every 6 to 8 
hours (maximum dose of 2.4 g a day)
Children: 
• Pain control/antipyretic treatment: 
5–10 mg/kg given every 6 to 8 hours
6–< 10 kg: 50 mg given every 8 hours
10–< 15 kg: 100 mg given every 8 hours
15–< 20 kg: 150 mg given every 8 hours
20–< 30 kg: 200 mg given every 8 hours
≥ 30 kg: use adult dose
Paracetamol 
(acetaminophen)b
Oral liquid: 120 mg/5 mL; 
125 mg/5 mL
Suppository: 100 mg
Tablet: 100 mg to 500 mg
Adults: 500 mg–1 g given every 4 to 6 
hours (maximum dose of 4 g a day)c
Children:
• Pain control/antipyretic treatment: 
10–15 mg/kg given every 6 hours
3–< 6 kg: 60 mg given every 6 hours
6–< 10 kg: 100 mg given every 6 hours
10–< 15 kg: 150 mg given every 6 hours
15–< 20 kg: 200 mg given every 6 hours
20–< 30 kg: 300 mg given every 6 hours
≥ 30 kg: use adult dose
a Not for children < 3 months.
b Not recommended for use as an anti-inflammatory as it has not been proven to have such an effect.
c In patients with hepatic impairment or cirrhosis, maximum daily dose should be 2 g.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book57
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
Antibiotic treatment 
Most cases of pharyngitis are of viral origin and do not benefit from antibiotics.
When bacterial pharyngitis is suspected or proven, the decision to give antibiotic 
treatment is usually based on the likelihood of Streptococcus pyogenes infection and on 
the local prevalence or patient history of rheumatic fever. Options to consider are given in 
Table 6.5. Second choice options reported in Table 6.5 should only be considered in patients 
allergic to first-choice options. In the case of clarithromycin, the prevalence of macrolide 
resistance in the setting where the patient acquired the infection should be considered 
since macrolide resistance among Streptococcus pyogenes is high is certain countries.
In general, patients will fall into one of the following two categories.
• Patients treated in settings with a low prevalence of rheumatic fever. Antibiotic 
treatment is not needed in most cases . Antibiotics could be considered in 
some patients who have a high likelihood of pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus 
pyogenes (i.e. Centor score 3–4). However, even with a Centor score of 3 or 4, 
antibiotic treatment is not necessary in most cases. Antibiotic treatment reduces 
sore throat pain only by around 1 day and the pain can alternatively be managed 
by regular analgesia.
 Antibiotic treatment could be discussed with patients or their caregivers on a 
case-by-case basis, weighing the benefits (e.g. reduced transmission and slight 
reduction in duration of symptoms) and risks (e.g. side-effects of antibiotics, 
effect on the intestinal microbiota) (66). Relief of symptoms or prevention of 
suppurative complications is not considered an indication for antibiotic treatment. 
The rationale is that most suppurative complications are not severe and can be 
readily recognized and treated. 
• Patients treated in settings with a medium to high prevalence of rheumatic fever 
and rheumatic heart disease or patients with a history of rheumatic fever or 
rheumatic heart disease. Antibiotic treatment is usually given if the likelihood of 
Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis is high (i.e. Centor score 3–4). The rationale is 
to prevent rheumatic fever or its recurrence. However, after 21 years of age, the 
risk of rheumatic fever is usually lower.
58The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
Table 6.5 – Empiric antibiotic treatment in patients with a high likelihood of 
Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis 
Note
The only clear indication for antibiotic treatment is to reduce the probability of developing 
rheumatic fever in endemic settings; however, after 21 years of age, the risk of rheumatic fever 
is lower.
Important
Where more than one antibiotic is recommended for an infection, they are listed in alphabetical 
order and they should be considered equal treatment options, unless otherwise indicated.
Adults Children Total treatment 
duration (67,68)
First 
choice
 Amoxicillin (oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR
 Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
(oral): 500 mg (800 000 IUa) 
given every 6 hours 
 Amoxicillin (oral): 80–90 
mg/kg/day 
Oral weight bands:
3–6 kg: 250 mg given every 
12 hours
6–< 10 kg: 375 mg given 
every 12 hours
10–< 15 kg: 500 mg given 
every 12 hours
15–< 20 kg: 750 mg given 
every 12 hours
≥ 20 kg: 500 mg given every 
8 hours or 1 g given every 
12 hours
OR
 Phenoxymethylpenicillin 
(oral): 10–15 mg/kg/dose 
(16 000–24 000 IU/kg/dosea) 
given every 6 to 8 hours
5b or 10c days 
depending on the 
local prevalence or 
previous history of 
rheumatic fever
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book59
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
6. Pharyngitis
Table 6.5 continued
Adults Children Total treatment 
duration (67,68)
Second 
choice
 Cefalexin (oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR
 Clarithromycin d (oral): 
500 mg given every 
12 hours
 Cefalexin (oral): 25 mg/kg/
dose given every 12 hours
Oral weight bands:
3–< 6 kg: 125 mg given 
every 12 hours
6–< 10 kg: 250 mg given 
every 12 hours
10–< 15 kg: 375 mg given 
every 12 hours
15–< 20 kg 500 mg given 
every 12 hours
20–< 30 kg: 625 mg given 
every 12 hours
≥ 30 kg: use adult dose
OR
 Clarithromycin d (oral): 
7.5 mg/kg/dose given every 
12 hours
5 days
IU: international units.
Note. All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
a Units of the potassium salt.
b In settings with a low prevalence of rheumatic fever or in patients with no history of rheumatic fever or rheumatic 
heart disease.
c In settings with a high prevalence of rheumatic fever or in patients with a history of rheumatic fever or rheumatic 
heart disease and who are aged between 3 and 21 years.
d In settings with a high prevalence of macrolide resistance among Streptococcus pyogenes, clarithromycin should 
not be recommended for the empiric treatment of Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis. Azithromycin could be used 
as an alternative (e.g. when clarithromycin is not available) but there are increasing concerns about its potential for 
the emergence and spread of antibiotic resistance because of its long half-life.
ACCESS antibiotics are highlighted in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.
Prevention
Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis, rheumatic fever and 
rheumatic heart disease
Currently, there is no licensed vaccine to prevent pharyngitis caused by Streptococcus 
pyogenes. Hand and respiratory hygiene are the best methods to limit transmission to
60The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
6. Pharyngitis
others. In countries where rheumatic fever is endemic, primary prevention of rheumatic 
fever relies on effective treatment of Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis.
In patients with a previous episode of rheumatic fever, long-term antibiotic 
prophylaxis with benzathine benzylpenicillin every 3–4 weeks is recommended in order to 
prevent subsequent episodes of Streptococcus pyogenes pharyngitis, which would carry a 
higher risk of a new episode of rheumatic fever and ultimately rheumatic heart disease (53). 
The duration of prophylaxis should be decided on a case-by-case basis.
Of note, WHO is currently developing guidelines for the prevention and management 
of rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease (52).
Other causes of bacterial pharyngitis: diphtheria
WHO recommends that all children worldwide be immunized against diphtheria and that 
people of any age who are unvaccinated or not fully vaccinated against diphtheria receive 
the doses necessary to complete their vaccination (54).

--- [WHO Pocket Book of Hospital Care for Children (2nd ed.) | p.129 | p.129-129 | audience=pediatric] ---
105
4. COUGH
Monitoring
The child’s condition, especially respiratory status, should be assessed by 
nurses every 3 h and by doctors twice a day. The child should occupy a bed 
close to the nursing station, so that any sign of incipient airway obstruction 
can be detected as soon as it develops.
4.6.2 Diphtheria 
Diphtheria is a bacterial infection, which can be prevented by immunization. 
Infection in the upper airway or nasopharynx produces a grey membrane, which, 
when present in the larynx or trachea, can cause stridor and obstruction. Nasal 
involvement produces a bloody discharge. 
Diphtheria toxin causes muscular paralysis 
and myocarditis, which are associated with 
mortality. 
Diagnosis
 ■Carefully examine the child’s nose and 
t
hroat and look for a grey, adherent 
membrane. Great care is needed when 
examining the throat, as the examination 
may precipitate complete obstruction 
of the airway. A child with pharyngeal 
diphtheria may have an obviously swollen neck, termed a ‘bull neck’.
Treatment
Antitoxin 
 /L50776Give 40 000 U diphtheria antitoxin (IM 
o
r IV) immediately, because delay can 
increase the risk for mortality. As there 
is a small risk for a serious allergic reaction to the horse serum in the antitoxin, an initial intradermal test to detect 
hypersensitivity should be carried out, as described in the instructions, and 
treatment for anaphylaxis should be available (see p. 108).
Antibiotics
 /L50776Any child with suspected diphtheria should be given a daily deep IM injection 
o
f procaine benzylpenicillin at 50 mg/kg (maximum, 1.2 g) daily for 10 days. 
This drug should not be given IV.
DIPHTHERIA
Pharyngeal membrane 
of diphtheria. Note: the 
membrane extends beyond 
the tonsils and covers the 
adjacent pharyngeal wall.
PB2_ch4.indd 105PB2_ch4.indd 105 5/06/13 10:06 AM5/06/13 10:06 AM

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 4.1.9 Rheumatic Fever | p.388-391 | audience=general] ---
A systemic connective tissue disease which follows a streptococcal
upper respiratory tract infection. It may involve the heart, joints, skin,
subcutaneous tissue, and CNS. The first attack usually occurs between
ages of 3–15 years.
Causes
~ Hypersensitivity reaction to group A streptococcal throat
infection
Clinical features
~ Arthritis (migrating asymmetric polyarthritis)
~ Acute rheumatic carditis, signs of cardiac failure, murmurs
and pericarditis
~ Subcutaneous nodules
~ Chorea (involuntary movements of limbs)
~ Skin rash
~ Other minor signs/symptoms: fever, arthralgia, laboratory
findings
Differential diagnosis
~ Any form of arthralgia/arthritis including sickle cell disease,
haemophilia
~ Pyrexia with cardiac failure
Investigations
- Blood: Haemogram (raised ESR)
- Chest X-ray
- ECG
- Echocardiography
- Antistreptolysin O titre (ASOT)
Diagnostic criteria (revised Jones criteria)
~ Evidence of recent streptococcal infection
322
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 4: Cardiovascular Diseases
- Elevated ASO-titer or other streptococcal Ab titres or positive
throat swab for group A beta-hemolyticus streptococcus
PLUS
~ Two major manifestations or one major and two minor
manifestations
MAJOR MANIFESTATIONS MINOR MANIFESTATIONS
~ Polyarthritis
~ Carditis
~ Erythema marginatum
~ Subcutaneous nodules
~ Sydehnam’s chorea
~ Polyarthralgia
~ Fever
~ Acute phase reactants (increased ESR/
CRP)
~ ECG: prolonged PR
in
TREATMENT LOC
- Bed rest
To eradicate any streptococci:
- Phenoxymethylpenicillin (Pen V) 250 mg every 6 hours
for 10 days
Child: 125 mg per dose
- Or Benzathine benzylpenicillin dose 1.2 MU IM stat
Child < 30 kg: 0.6 MU
Child > 30 kg: 1.2 MU
To treat the inflammation
- Acetylsalicylic acid 4-8 g/day untill signs of inflammation
subside (usually 4-8 weeks)
Child: 80-100 mg/kg/day in 3 doses
- Plus magnesium trisilicate compound 2-4 tablets every 8 hours
HC4
Management of stable angina
323
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 4: Cardiovascular Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
Taken 30 minutes after the acetylsalicylic acid tablets
If allergic to aspirin
- Low dose steroid
HC4
If carditis/heart failure symptoms
- Treat as per heart failure guidelines (section 4.1.3)
- Consider high dose steroids (specialist only)
If chorea:
- Valproate 10-20 mg/kg/day
H
Prophylaxis
To prevent further episodes
- Pen V 500 mg 12 hourly
Child: 125-250 mg 12 hourly
- Or Benzathine benzylpenicillin 1.2 MU IM every 4 weeks
Child <30 kg: 0.6 MU
If allergic to penicillin:
- Erythromycin 250 mg 12 hourly
- Child: 10 mg/kg twice a day
Duration of prophylaxis depends on severity of disease:
- Rheumatic fever without carditis: for 5 years or
until age 18 or 21 years old
- Carditis but no residual heart disease: for 10 years
- or until age 25 years old
- Carditis with residual heart disease: untill age 40-
45 years or for life
HC3
Management of stable angina
324
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 4: Cardiovascular Diseases
Prevention
~ Early diagnosis and treatment of group A Streptococcus
throat infection
~ Avoid overcrowding, good housing
~ Good nutrition

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 21.3.3 Pharyngitis (Sore Throat) | p.1035-1036 | audience=general] ---
Inflammation of the throat
Causes
~ Most cases are viral
~ Bacterial: commonly Group A haemolytic Streptococci, diphtheria in non-immunized children
~ Gonorrhoea (usually from oral sex)
~ May also follow ingestion of undiluted spirits
~ Candida albicans in the immunosuppressed
Clinical features
~ Abrupt onset
~ Throat pain
~ Pain on swallowing
~ Mild fever, loss of appetite, general malaise
~ In children: nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea
~ The presence of runny nose, hoarseness, cough, conjunctivitis,
viral rash, diarrhea suggests viral infection
~ The presence of tonsilar exudates, tender neck glands, high fever, and absence of cough suggest a bacterial pharyngotonsillitis
(see section 21.3.4)
Differential diagnosis
~ Tonsillitis, epiglottitis, laryngitis
~ Otitis media if there is referred pain
Investigations
- Throat examination with torch and tongue depressor
- Throat swab for microscopy, C&S
970
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 21 : Ear, Nose & Throat Conditions
- Blood: Full blood count
- Serological test for haemolytic streptococci (ASOT)
TREATMENT LOC
Supportive care
Most cases are viral and do not require antibiotics
- Keep the patient warm
- Give plenty of (warm) oral fluids e.g., tea
- Give analgesics, e.g., Paracetamol for 3 days
- Review the patient for progress
For Streptococcal pharyngitis: see section 21.3.4
HC2
Notes
- If not properly treated, streptococcal pharyngitis may
lead to acute rheumatic fever and retropharyngeal or
peritonsillar abscess
- Therefore ensure that the full 10-day courses of
antibiotics are completed where applicable

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 21.3.4 Pharyngo-Tonsillitis | p.1036-1037 | audience=general] ---
Inflammation of the tonsils
Cause
~ Streptococcal infection (most common)
~ Viral infection (less common)
Clinical features
~ Sudden onset, most common in children
~ Sore throat
~ Fever, shivering, headache, vomiting
~ Tonsils enlarged and with exudate and cervical lymph nodes
Complications
~ Local: peritonsillar cellulitis and abscess (quinsy),
971
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 21 : Ear, Nose & Throat Conditions
~ Systemic complications: bacterial endocarditis, glomerulonephritis, rheumatic fever (see section 4.1.9)
Differential diagnosis
~ Pharyngitis
~ Submandibular lymphadenitis
~ Investigations
~ Throat swab: For C&S
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Bacterial pharyngotonsillitis
- Phenoxymethylpenicillin 500 mg every 6 hours for 10 days
- Child: 10-20 mg/kg per dose
- Or Benzathine penicillin 1.2 MU IM single dose
- Child: <30 kg: 30,000 IU/kg
If allergic to penicillin
- Erythromycin 500 mg every 6 hours for 10 days
- Child: 12.5 mg/kg per dose
Viral pharyngotonsillitis
- Treat symptomatically with analgesics and increased
oral fluids
HC2

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 21.3.5 Peritonsillar Abscess (Quinsy) | p.1037-1040 | audience=general] ---
An abscess between the tonsil capsule and the lateral wall of the pharynx
Cause
~ Follows (often mild) tonsillitis attack
Clinical features
~ Severe throat pain
~ Fever, headache, malaise, rigors may occur
~ Inability to open the mouth; salivation and dribbling
972
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 21 : Ear, Nose & Throat Conditions
~ Bad mouth odour
~ Thickened muffled (unclear) speech
~ Ear pain
~ Enlarged cervical lymph nodes
~ Tonsil and soft palate reddish and oedematous
~ Swelling pushing the uvula to opposite side
~ – May be pointing (bulging collection of pus)
Differential diagnosis
~ Tumour
~ Tonsillitis
~ Abscess in the pharynx
Investigations
- Carry out C&S on pus if present or after drainage
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Early stages: Disease of adolescents and adults
- Conservative management
- Bed rest
- Adult: Benzylpenicillin 2 MU IV or IM every 6 hours
for 48 hours then switch to amoxicillin 500 mg every 8
hours to complete a total of 7 days
If not better in 48 hours
- Ceftriaxone 1 g IV once daily for 7 days Child: 50 mg/
kg IV
- Plus metronidazole 500 mg IV every 8 hours Child: 10
mg/kg IV every 8 hours
HC2
973
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 21 : Ear, Nose & Throat Conditions
TREATMENT LOC
If unable to take oral fluids
- Set up an IV drip e.g. Normal saline
When swelling is marked
- Surgery (which should be done by a trained person)
- Suction facility will be needed
- Carry out incision and drainage at the most
pointing area with the protected tip of no.11
surgical blade
- 6 weeks later: Refer for tonsillectomy as this condition
might recur
Prevention
~ Prompt and adequate treatment of tonsillitis
974
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 22 : Skin Diseases
