# TOPIC: skin_soft_tissue_mild

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 16. Skin and soft tissue infections - mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis | p.209-221 | audience=general] ---
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book193
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – 
mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas 
and cellulitis
This chapter does not cover severe skin infections or skin infections caused by viral, fungal or 
parasitic pathogens, or management of diabetic foot infections. Please refer to the specific 
chapters about other skin and soft tissue infections – traumatic wounds (including bite 
wounds), burn wounds, necrotizing fasciitis, pyomyositis, if these infections are suspected. 
Key messages
• Topical treatment can be used for mild impetigo.
• Diagnostic tests are usually not needed in mild cases (avoid swabs of intact skin).
• The most likely causative pathogens are Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus spp. 
• Oral antibiotics of the Access group are adequate for most cases.
• There is no need to empirically treat for MRSA in most cases.
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Pocket book of hospital care for children: guidelines for the management of common 
childhood illnesses, 2013 (31).
Definition
The terminology used to define skin and soft tissue infections has changed over the years. 
In general, the terms bacterial skin and soft tissue infections and bacterial skin and skin 
structures infections are often used interchangeably. 
While there is no universally accepted classification of skin infections, there are 
numerous ways to classify skin and soft tissue infections based on certain characteristics 
of the infection such as anatomic location (folliculitis, fasciitis, myositis), body location (e.g. 
extremities, face), timing (acute, chronic, recurrent), presence of tissue necrosis (necrotizing 
or not necrotizing), macroscopic presence of pus (purulent or non-purulent) or involvement
194The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
of deep subcutaneous tissue and/or severity of disease (complicated or uncomplicated). 
Further classifications are based on the origin of the infection (bites, burns; see corresponding 
chapters) or host characteristics (e.g. immunosuppression, diabetes).
A more recent definition by the United States Food and Drug Administration uses 
the term acute bacterial skin and skin structure infections (ABSSSI) to include a subset 
of conditions such as cellulitis and erysipelas, wound infections and major cutaneous 
abscesses, provided the area of the skin surface affected is at least 75 cm 2. This definition 
was introduced “to assist sponsors developing drugs for the treatment of skin infections” 
and has limited clinical applicability outside trials (165).
This chapter focuses on the mild superficial forms of skin infections that do not affect 
deeper tissue layers: impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis. For the more severe forms of skin 
and soft tissue infections, please refer to the corresponding chapters: necrotizing fasciitis, 
pyomyositis, burn wounds and severe infections with sepsis. The following syndromes are 
not covered in the current edition of the AWaRe book: acne, diabetic foot infections and 
surgical site infections.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
195
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Impetigo / Erysipelas / Cellulitis
Skin and soft tissue infection
Super /g246cial bac terial sk in infec tions , not affec ting the deeper
tissue lay ers
De/g246nition
Treatment
Clinical Considerations
• need to hav e good activit yEmpiric antibiotic options
against both (gr oup A )Streptococcus pyogenes Streptococcus
and MSSA
•:Empiric treatment against community-acquired MRSA
C onsider in selec te d cases based on individual risk fact ors ,
kn ow n colonization and local p re valenc e
• : Oral t re atment is adequa teMild infections
• : Ma y be r equir ed if inf ec tionIntravenous antibiotics
rapidly spr eading and not r esponding to oral antibiotics
Tr ea t f or 5 days
L onge r duration s m a y b e r equir e d i n c as e o f n o c linical
impr ovemen t o r i f a n u nderlyin g medica l c onditio n i s p r esen t
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Diagnosis
Clinical Presentation
Not needed in most mild cases
•T issue swab cultur es ar e to be av oided , especially in case
of intac t sk in
Microbiology Tests
Not needed in most mild cases
Other LaboratoryTests
Routine imaging of mild cases not necessar y
•Ultrasound may be consider ed if abscess or subdermal
in v olv ement suspec te d
Imaging
Topical Treatment
Impetigo: A cute onset of super /g246cial sk in lesions usually
without systemic symptoms
•M ost cases: papules pr ogr essing to v esicles and pustules
that br eak to form crusts ( )non-bullous form
•M inority of cases: v esicles ev olv e to form larger bullae
() bullous form
Erysipelas: A cute onset of a painful r ed sk in lesion with
w ell- de/g246ned indurated margins usually on face or legs
•Bullae may be pr esent or dev elop in /g246rst days
•F ev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) and other signs of systemic infec tion may
be pr esen t
Cellulitis: A cute onset of a sk in lesion pr esenting with
r edness , sw elling and induration, warmth and pain or
tenderness of the affe ct ed ar ea
•M ost commonly affect ed ar eas: legs and fac e
•F ev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) and other signs of systemic infec tion may
be pr esen t
•R edness alone may not indicate an infec tion
•A clear clinical distinction between cellulitis and
erysipelas is often difficult to mak e
Bacteria (most cases):
•( group A ) - especially inStreptococcus pyogenes Streptococcus
case of er ysipelas
• (including MRSA )Staphylococcus aureus
Additional bacteria (more rarely e.g immunocompromised
and/or diabetic patients, traumatic skin lesions):
•Enterobacterales
• spp .Pseudomonas
•A naer obes
Most Likely Pathogens
This guidance excludes skin infections caused by viral, fungal or
parasitic pathogens; diabetic foot infections; necrotizing fasciitis;
pyomyositis; severe infections with sepsis; and surgical site infections
Localized non-bullous impetigo:T opical tre atment i s
pr eferr ed o ve r an oral antibiotic , whenev er possible .
Fo r example , a 5 da y course with mupir ocin 2% ointmen t
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise indicated
Antibiotic Treatment
Amo xicillin+clavulanic acid 500 mg+125 mg
q8h ORAL
C efalexin 500 mg q8h ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Clo xacillin 500 mg q6h ORAL
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Cloxacillin and cefalexin have a narrower spectrum of
antibacterial activity compared to amoxicillin+clavulanic acid
with good effic acy in mild skin and soft tissue infections. From
an antibiotic stewardship perspective, these would be the
preferred options whenever possible (except for bite wounds)
If cloxacillin is unavailable, dicloxacillin or /g248ucloxacillin could
be used
196
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Impetigo / Erysipelas / Cellulitis
Skin and soft tissue infection • Page 1 of 2
Not needed in most mild cases
Other LaboratoryTests
Clinical Presentation
Impetigo: A cute onset of super /g246cial sk in lesions usually
without systemic symptoms
•M ost cases: papules pr ogr essing to v esicles and pustules
that br eak to form crusts () non-bullous form
•M inority of cases: v esicles ev olv e to form larger bullae
() bullous form
Erysipelas: A cute onset of a painful r ed sk in lesion with
w ell- de/g246ned indurated margins usually on face or legs
•Bullae may be pr esent or dev elop in /g246rst days
•F ev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) and other signs of systemic infec tion ma y
be pr esen t
Cellulitis: A cute onset of a sk in lesion pr esenting with
r edness , sw elling and induration, warmth and pain or
tenderness of the affec ted ar ea
•M ost commonly affec ted ar eas: legs and fac e
•F ev er (≥ 38.0 °C ) and other signs of systemic infec tion ma y
be pr esen t
•R edness alone may not indicate an infec tion
•A clear clinical distinction between cellulitis and
erysipelas is often difficult to ma ke
Super /g246cial bac terial sk in infec tions , not affec ting the deeper
tissue lay ers
De/g246nition
Bacteria (most cases):
•( group A) - especially inStreptococcus pyogenes Streptococcus
case of er ysipelas
• (including MRSA )Staphylococcus aureus
Most Likely PathogensThis guidance excludes skin infections caused by viral, fungal or
parasitic pathogens; necrotizing fasciitis; pyomyositis; severe
infections with sepsis; and surgical site infections
Diagnosis
Not needed in most mild cases
•T issue swab cultur es ar e to be av oided , especially in case
of intac t sk in
Microbiology Tests
Routine imaging of mild cases not necessar y
•Ultrasound may be consider ed if abscess or subdermal
in v olv ement suspec te d
Imaging
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
197
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Impetigo / Erysipelas / Cellulitis
Skin and soft tissue infection • Page 2 of 2
Clinical Considerations
• need to have good activityEmpiric antibiotic options
against both Group A and MSSAStreptococcus
•:Empiric treatment against community-acquired MRSA
Consider in selected cases based on individual risk factors,
known colonization and local prevalence
•: Oral treatment is adequateMild infections
•: May be required if infectionIntravenous antibiotics
rapidly spreading and not responding to oral antibiotics
Treatment
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotics are listed in alphabetical order and should be
considered equal treatment options unless otherwise indicated
Antibiotic Treatment
Treat for 5 days
Longer durations may be required in case of no clinical
improvement or if an underlying medical condition is present
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Topical Treatment
Localized non-bullous impetigo:Topical treatment is
preferred over an oral antibiotic, whenever possible.
For example, a 5 day course with mupirocin 2% ointment
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid 80-90 mg/kg/day
of amoxicillin component ORAL
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 250 mg of amox/dose q12h
6-<10 kg 375 mg of amox/dose q12h
10-<15 kg 500 mg of amox/dose q12h
15-<20 kg 750 mg of amox/dose q12h
≥20 kg 500 mg of amox/dose q8h or
1 g of amox/dose q12h
Amox = amoxicillin
Oral liquid must be refrigerated after reconstitution
Cefalexin 25 mg/kg/dose q12h ORAL
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 125 mg q12h
6-<10 kg 250 mg q12h
10-<15 kg 375 mg q12h
15-<20 kg 500 mg q12h
20-<30 kg 625 mg q12h
≥30 kg 500 mg q8h
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Cloxacillin 15 mg/kg/dose q6h ORAL
•:Oral weight bands
3-<6 kg 62.5 mg q6h
6-<10 kg 125 mg q6h
10-<15 kg 250 mg q6h
15-<20 kg 375 mg q6h
≥20 kg 500 mg q6h
Cloxacillin and cefalexin have a narrower spectrum of
antibacterial activity compared to amoxicillin+clavulanic acid
with good effic acy in mild skin and soft tissue infections. From
an antibiotic stewardship perspective, these would be the
preferred options whenever possible (except for bite wounds)
If cloxacillin is unavailable, dicloxacillin or /g248ucloxacillin could
be used
198The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Pathophysiology
Damage of the skin can lead to infections of the deeper layers beneath the epidermis. When 
such damage occurs, both endogenous pathogens (i.e. that naturally reside in the body) 
and exogenous pathogens (i.e. that enter the body from the environment) can penetrate 
the epidermis and spread to deeper structures through the lymphatic system. Depending 
on the depth of the infection, different clinical diseases can occur: impetigo and erysipelas 
(infections of the upper layer of the skin) and cellulitis (infection of the deep dermis and 
subcutaneous tissue) (Figure 16.1). Cellulitis of the face can also occur as a consequence 
of local spreading of a dental infection, for example, dental abscess spreading to the 
surrounding soft tissue can result in cellulitis.
Figure 16.1 – Anatomy of the skin and locations of common infections
Epidermis
Dermis
Subcutaneous tissue
Muscle
Fascia
Cellulitis,
Lymphangitis
Necrotizing
fasciitis
Impetigo,
Erysipelas
Depth of infectionSkin layers
Epidemiology
Bacterial skin infections occur worldwide and can affect all age groups; erysipelas is more 
frequent in children and elderly patients. In 2013, skin diseases (not limited to bacterial 
infections) were the fourth leading cause of non-fatal diseases (166). Cellulitis, the most 
common skin infection, accounted for 0.04% (4 in 10 000) of the overall burden of all 
diseases combined in 2013. It was the only skin condition that showed a significant 
decrease (–13.2%) between 2005 and 2013 in disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), a proxy 
for morbidity and mortality. This decrease was attributed to reduced mortality (166). In 2017, 
the Global Burden of Disease study reported 43 million new cases of cellulitis worldwide (44). 
Diabetes, peripheral arterial disease, HIV infection and other causes of immunosuppression 
are risk factors for severe skin infections.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book199
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Most likely pathogens
The most common pathogens causing skin infections are listed in Table 16.1.
Table 16.1 – Pathogens most frequently associated with skin infections (in 
descending order of frequency)
Most cases More rarely (e.g. in 
immunocompromised 
and/or diabetic patients, 
traumatic skin lesions) 
Cases with specific 
environmental exposures
Streptococcus 
pyogenes (group 
A Streptococcus), 
especially in the case 
of erysipelas
Staphylococcus aureus 
(including MRSA)
Enterobacterales (including 
multidrug-resistant strains such 
as those producing ESBL and 
carbapenemases) 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
(including multidrug-resistant 
strains such as those producing 
ESBL and carbapenemases)
Anaerobes
Aeromonas hydrophila 
(exposure to fresh water)
Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae 
(contact with animals 
colonized with the organism, 
mostly pigs and fish) 
Vibrio vulnificus (exposure to 
seawater)
ESBL: extended-spectrum beta-lactamases; MRSA: methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.
Clinical presentation (only mild cases are covered)
The morphology of different skin lesions is described in Table 16.2 and illustrated in Figure 16.2.
Table 16.2 – Morphology of skin lesions
Type of skin lesion Morphology
Bulla Larger (> 10 mm) fluid-filled blister
Papule Small (< 10 mm), elevated lesion that can be palpated
Pustule Small (< 10 mm) vesicle containing pus
Vesicle Small (< 10 mm) fluid-filled blister
200The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Figure 16.2 – Types and morphology of skin lesions
Vesicle
Bulla
Papule
Pustule
Impetigo
Impetigo is characterized by acute onset of superficial skin lesions usually without associated 
systemic symptoms. In most cases, impetigo presents with papules that progress to vesicles and 
pustules which break to finally form crusts (non-bullous form) (Figure 16.3). In a minority of cases 
(mostly in young children), vesicles develop to form larger bullae (bullous form).
Figure 16.3 – Case of impetigo on the chin
Source:© James Heilman, MD, CC BY-SA 4.0, via Wikimedia Commons
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book201
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Erysipelas
Erysipelas is characterized by acute onset of a red skin lesion with well defined indurated 
margins, usually on the face or legs (Figure 16.4). Bullae may be present or develop in the 
first few days. The lesion is usually painful. Fever (≥ 38.0 °C) and other signs of systemic 
infection (e.g. tachycardia, leukocytosis) may be present.
Figure 16.4 – Case of erysipelas on the cheek
Source: CDC Public Health Image Library/Dr Thomas F . Sellers, Emory University
Cellulitis
While erysipelas affects only the superficial skin layers and has clearly demarcated borders, 
cellulitis also affects subcutaneous tissues. Cellulitis is characterized by an acute onset of 
a skin lesion presenting with a combination of redness, swelling and induration, warmth 
and pain (or tenderness) of the affected area (see Figure 16.5). The condition can occur 
anywhere on the body, but predominantly affects the skin of the lower part of the legs and 
feet or the face. 
In patients with cellulitis, fever (≥ 38.0 °C) and other signs of systemic infection (e.g. 
tachycardia, leukocytosis) may be present. Skin redness alone may not indicate an infection, 
for example, redness is often present in patients with chronic venous stasis – bilateral versus 
unilateral involvement may indicate a non-infectious etiology, although bilateral cellulitis 
can occasionally occur. The severity of the infection should always be carefully assessed, 
especially to exclude the possibility of involvement of the muscular fascia (fasciitis). Facial 
and neck cellulitis, commonly arising from dental infection, can lead to potentially fatal 
deep space infections such as Ludwig angina. Cellulitis of the face can spread to the brain
202The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
and lead to serious complications such as cavernous sinus thrombosis. These are medical 
emergencies but are overall rare.
Figure 16.5 – Case of cellulitis in the lower leg
Source: John Campbell, CC0 1.0 Universal (CC0 1.0), via Flickr
Laboratory tests 
Patient microbiology tests
Most mild cases of impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis do not require routine microbiology 
tests. Surface swabs of intact, unbroken skin should not be taken in cases of erysipelas 
or cellulitis to avoid detecting pathogens that colonize the skin leading to unnecessary 
antibiotic treatment.
Tissue swab cultures can be considered in certain cases (Table 16.3). For example, 
cultures could be done for lesions that are clearly purulent (therefore most likely due 
to Staphylococcus aureus ) to diagnose or exclude the presence of methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). However, in many settings doing tissue swab cultures is not 
standard practice outside of the operating theatre. When swabs are taken, the lesion should 
always be cleaned and debrided before sample collection to identify the pathogens causing 
the infection and not colonizing organisms. For a correct interpretation of cultures, it is very 
important that the origin of the culture (exact location, superficial swab or intraoperatively 
obtained culture) is adequately documented.
Cultures can be considered for chronic lesions such as diabetic foot infections 
(not covered in this chapter) to exclude the presence of multidrug-resistant organisms, for 
example, those producing extended-spectrum beta-lactamases (ESBLs).
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book203
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Table 16.3 – Microbiology tests to consider for the diagnosis of skin infections in 
certain cases as indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Setting where the test 
should be available
Tissue swab culture 
and antimicrobial 
susceptibility testing
Initial step to detect and identify 
bacterial and fungal species for selection 
of appropriate antimicrobial regimens
Health care facilities 
with clinical 
laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics.
Other tests
Routine laboratory tests are not required in mild cases (167).
Using microbiology surveillance data
Routine surveillance is not helpful in informing empiric guidance. 
Imaging
Routine imaging of mild cases of impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis is not necessary. However, 
initial imaging (e.g. ultrasound, X-ray) may be considered if an abscess or subdermal involvement 
are suspected. In these cases, management often requires a surgical approach, for example, 
incision and drainage in case of abscess and management of the primary dental cause.
Topical treatment (only for localized non-bullous 
impetigo)
For localized non-bullous impetigo, topical treatment could be considered as an alternative 
to oral antibiotics. This treatment can be as effective as oral antibiotic treatment and has the 
advantage that the risk of adverse events is minimal because of less systemic absorption (168). 
Of the different topical treatments available, mupirocin ointment (2%) could be 
considered for a short course of treatment (5 days). However, widespread use of mupirocin 
can rapidly increase resistance to mupirocin in Staphylococcus aureus and limit its usefulness 
for targeted preventive purposes in carriers of Staphylococcus aureus; mupirocin is active 
against both methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus and MRSA. Alternative treatments 
are available but they are not included in the EML and EMLc (8,9). These alternatives are 
fusidic acid and hydrogen peroxide cream (1%). Topical corticosteroids should not be used 
routinely in these cases.
204The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Antibiotic treatment (for widespread impetigo, 
erysipelas and cellulitis)
In most cases of mild infections, oral antibiotic treatment is adequate (Table 16.4). Empiric 
antibiotic options need to have good activity against the most likely pathogens (Streptococcus 
spp. and Staphylococcus aureus). Empiric treatment against community-acquired MRSA may 
be considered in certain cases (e.g. clearly purulent lesions) based on individual risk factors 
(e.g. known MRSA colonization) and on the local prevalence of community-acquired MRSA. 
In these cases, the literature suggests using clindamycin or sulfamethoxazole+trimethoprim; 
these options are however not currently listed in the EML and EMLc for this indication.
Table 16.4 – Empiric antibiotic treatment for mild skin infections
Important
Where more than one antibiotic is recommended for an infection, they are listed in alphabetical 
order and they should be considered equal treatment options, unless otherwise indicated.
Note
Cloxacillin and cefalexin have a narrower spectrum of antibacterial activity compared to 
amoxicillin+clavulanic acid with good efficacy in mild skin and soft tissue infections. Therefore, 
from an antibiotic stewardship perspective, these two antibiotics are the preferred options 
whenever possible.
Adults Children Total treatment 
duration
 Amoxicillin+clavulanic 
 acid (oral): 500 mg + 125 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR
 Cefalexin (oral): 500 mg 
given every 8 hours
OR
 Cloxacillin a (oral): 500 mg 
given every 6 hours
 Amoxicillin+clavulanic acid b (oral): 
80–90 mg/kg/day of amoxicillin component
Oral weight bands:
3–< 6 kg: 250 mg of amoxicillin/dose 
given every 12 hours
6–< 10 kg: 375 mg of amoxicillin/dose 
given every 12 hours
10–< 15 kg: 500 mg of amoxicillin/dose 
given every 12 hours
15–< 20 kg: 750 mg of amoxicillin/dose 
given every 12 hours
≥ 20kg: 500 mg of amoxicillin/dose given 
every 8 hours or 1 g of amoxicillin/dose 
given every 12 hours
OR
5 daysd
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book205
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
16. Skin and soft tissue infections – mild bacterial impetigo, erysipelas and cellulitis
Table 16.4 continued
Adults Children Total treatment 
duration
 Cefalexin (oral): 25 mg/kg/dose given 
every 12 hours
Oral weight bands:
3–< 6 kg: 125 mg given every 12 hours
6–< 10 kg: 250 mg given every 12 hours
10–< 15 kg: 375 mg given every 12 hours
15–< 20 kg: 500 mg given every 12 hours
20–< 30 kg: 625 mg given every 12 hours
≥ 30 kg: use adult dose
OR
 Cloxacillin a,c (oral): 15 mg/kg/dose 
given every 6 hours
Oral weight bands: 
3–< 6 kg: 62.5 mg given every 6 hours
6–< 10 kg: 125 mg given every 6 hours
10–< 15 kg: 250 mg given every 6 hours
15–< 20 kg: 375 mg given every 6 hours
≥ 20 kg: 500 mg given every 6 hours
Note. All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
a If cloxacillin is unavailable, dicloxacillin or flucloxacillin could be used.
b Oral liquid formulations must be refrigerated after reconstitution as clavulanic acid is rapidly metabolized in high 
ambient temperatures.
c The WHO Pocket book of hospital care for children (31) suggests amoxicillin plus cloxacillin. However, cloxacillin 
can be safely used as a single antibiotic option because it has good activity against both methicillin-susceptible 
Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pyogenes (often referred to as group A Streptococcus). Amoxicillin alone is 
not suitable because it has variable activity against methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus.
d The optimal duration of antibiotic treatment is not known (169); duration is often individualized based on clinical 
response.
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 16.6.3 Mastitis/Breast Abscess | p.848-850 | audience=general] ---
Infection of the breast usually in a breastfeeding mother. Causes
- Usually Staphylococcus aureus enters from the baby’s mouth
through a cracked nipple into an engorged breast. Less
frequently Streptococci
Clinical features
- Pain in the breast, which is swollen, often shiny, and tender
with enlarged veins
- Often in 2nd postpartum week
- Fever
- May proceed to become an abscess; a collection of pus within the breast tissue
- There may be localised erythema (shinny red skin)
- Firm lump, felt initially but may later become fluctuant
- May drain pus spontaneously
783
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 16: Obstetric Conditions
Complications
- Recurrent infection, scarring
- Loss of breast size, noticeable breast asymmetry
- Mammary duct fistula formation due to reccurrence
Differential diagnosis
- Breast engorgement (for mastitis)
- Breast lump/cancer (for abscess)
Investigations
- Breast milk: For C&S
- US scan to rule out breast abscess in patients with recurrent
mastitis
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- Stop breastfeeding on the affected breast but express
milk and discard to avoid breast engorgement
- Give analagesics such as paracetamol 1 g every 8
hours for 3 days
- Apply warm compresses to relieve pain in affected breast
- Continue breastfeeding on the normal breast
- Give cloxacillin 500 mg 6 hourly for 10 days or
- (If not available use amoxicillin 500 mg every
8 hours for 10 days)
HC2
HC3
H
- If penicillin allergies: erythromycin 500 mg every 6
hours for 10 days
- Or cephalexin 500 mg PO every six hours for
10 days
If not improving
- Refer to hospital for utrasound scan and further management
- If clinical or US scan features of breast abscess: incise
and drain
784
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 16: Obstetric Conditions
Prevention
- Proper attachment of baby on the breast
- Frequent emptying of the breast
- Ensure the baby is sucking on the areolar and not the nipple
- Manage breast engorgement if not breastfeeding, or lost baby
(Refer to section on care of the mother and baby immediately
after delivery)

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 22.1.1 Impetigo | p.1040-1042 | audience=general] ---
A very superficial bacterial infection of the epidermis (upper/outer layer
of skin), bullous and non bullous impetigo
Cause
~ Streptococcus or staphylococcus infection, or both
Clinical features
~ Common in children, although it can also occur in adults.
~ Lesions usually on face, head, and hands as bullae, or small
brown crusts on an erythematous base
~ In some cases, large flaccid bullae containing pus and serum are
formed commonly in the axilla and groin
Differential diagnosis
~ Pemphigus foliaceus
Investigations
- Pus swab for Gram stain
- Culture and sensitivity (exudate from unroofed lesion)
Skin Diseases22
975
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 22 : Skin Diseases
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Cleaning
- Clean affected area with chlorhexidine solution 0.05%
Antiseptic: if infection mild and localised (<5 lesions)
- Apply gentian violet aqueous paint 0.5% every 12 hours
for 3 days
- OR apply silver sulphadiazine 1% cream 12 hourly for
5 days OR apply Mupirocin(supirocin) 2% 8 hourly for
5 to 7 days.
Antiseptic: if infection mild and localised (<5 lesions)
- Apply gentian violet aqueous paint 0.5% every 12 hours
for 3 days
- OR apply silver sulphadiazine 1% cream 12 hourly for
5 days
- Keep skin clean by frequent washing and drying
- Use soap and water to soften, and gently remove any
superficial crusts
Systemic antibacterial: if signs of regional or systemic spread,
e.g., pyrexia, >5 lesions
- Cloxacillin 250–500 mg every 6 hours before food for
7 days Child: 12.5–25 mg/kg per dose
- Or in penicillin allergy, erythromycin 250-500 mg every
6 hours for 7 days Child: 7.5 mg/kg per dose
HC2
Note
- Impetigo is contagious until the lesions have dried up
- Isolate/ separate from other patients – in case of admission
976
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 22 : Skin Diseases
Prevention
~ Proper hygiene with use of antiseptic soap

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 22.1.3 Cellulitis and Erysipelas | p.1043-1045 | audience=general] ---
Cellulitis is an acute inflammation of the skin involving the dermis and
subcutaneous tissues, caused mainly by streptococci and staphylococci.
Erysipelas has a raised demarcated border, whereas the border is not
distinct in cellulitis.
Causes
~ Streptococcus and S. Aureus, in adults
~ Haemophilus influenza type b in children under 3 years
978
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 22 : Skin Diseases
~ Cellulitis is sometimes caused by other organisms e.g, pseudomonas picked from bath tubs to a lesser extent
Predisposing factors
~ Minor trauma
~ Pre-existing lesion such as ulcer or erosion
~ Iatrogenic, via intra venous therapy (cannulation) and prolonged
hospitalization
Clinical features
~ Erythema (reddening)
~ Pain, swelling +/- loss of function, tenderness
~ Acute localised swelling and oedema
~ In erysipelas, lesions are more superficial and have a defined
raised margin
~ Skin becomes tense and shiny in advanced stages
~ Regional lymphadentiis may be present
Differential diagnosis
~ Lymphoedema
~ Acute osteomyelitis
~ Deep vein thrombosis (DVT)
~ Blunt trauma/fracture
Investigations
- Pus swab for Gram staining and culture and sensitivity
NB; Investigations depend on differential diagnosis list, e.g. Xray,
Doppler, CBC.etc.
979
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 22 : Skin Diseases
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- Elevate the affected limb
- Give an analgesic e.g., paracetamol 1 g every 6-8 hours
as required, Child: 10 mg/kg
- Antibiotics: cloxacillin 250-500 mg every 6 hours before
food for 7 days
- Child: 12.5-25 mg/kg per dose
- OR in penicillin allergy, erythromycin 500 mg every 6
hours
- Child: 7.5 mg/kg per dose
If severe
- IV ceftriaxone
- Adult: 1 g every 12 hours for 3 days
- Child: 50 mg/kg
- Then oral antibiotics to complete 1 week of antibiotics
HC3

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 23.2.4 Acute Periapical Abscess or Dental Abscess | p.1079-1081 | audience=general] ---
K04.6-7
Infection with pus formation at the root of a tooth as a sequel to pulpitis
caused by dental caries or trauma
Causes
~ Mixed bacterial flora but mainly Staphylococcus spp
Clinical features
~ Severe pain that disturbs sleep
~ Facial swelling may be localized in the gum or extend to adjacent
tissues
1014
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 23 : Oral and Dental Conditions
~ Abscesses of the mandibular incisors or molars may discharge
extra orally
~ Affected tooth is mobile and tender to percussion
~ Fever and headache may be present if infection has spread
Differential diagnosis
~ Gingivitis
~ Swelling due to trauma
~ Pain due to sinusitis, temporomandibular joint pain dysfunction
syndrome, or erupting wisdom teeth
~ Dentine sensitivity due to thermal, tactile, or osmotic stimulus
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Infections localized to a tooth and its surroundings (swelling limited to the gum and no signs of infection extending to anatomical structures, or general signs of infection)
- Pain relief (paracetamol and/or ibuprofen)
- Root canal therapy if possible or extraction of tooth
- NO NEED of antibiotics since they cannot reach
the site of infection
If infection is spreading to local adjacent structures (painful
gingival and buccal swelling) or systemic signs and symptoms
(fever) are present:
- Surgical treatment
- Then amoxicillin 500 mg every 8 hours
- Child: amoxicillin dispersible tablets 25 mg/kg
(max 250 mg) every 8 hours
HC4
1015
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 23 : Oral and Dental Conditions
TREATMENT LOC
- Plus metronidazole 400 mg every 8 hours
- Child: 10-12.5 mg/kg (max 200 mg per dose)
- Paracetamol 1 g every 8 hours
- Child: 10-15 mg/kg every 8 hours
- Or Ibuprofen 400 mg every 8 hours
- Child: 7-13 mg/kg every 8 hours
