# TOPIC: sti_chlamydia

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 19. Sexually transmitted infections - chlamydial urogenital infection | p.246-256 | audience=general] ---
230The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
19. Sexually transmitted infections 
– chlamydial urogenital infection
Note
In general this chapter applies to adults and young people older than 12 years. In children, 
specialist advice should be sought where possible. Consideration should be given that an STI in 
a child may be due to child sexual abuse.
Key messages
• Chlamydia trachomatis urogenital infection is a common sexually transmitted infection (STI) 
globally, especially among young sexually active people.
• Symptoms overlap with gonococcal infection and co-infection is frequent. Therefore, 
patients should be tested for both pathogens simultaneously, when available and evaluated 
for other STIs (e.g. human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection, syphilis, trichomoniasis).
• Asymptomatic people should also be treated because they can transmit the infection to others.
• Preventive services should be offered (e.g. condoms, brief sexuality education, HIV preexposure prophylaxis to people at high risk of HIV infection) and sexual partners should be 
informed and treated.
• Reporting of this infection to health authorities is encouraged according to local regulations.
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) – fact sheets (189).
• WHO guidelines for the treatment of Chlamydia trachomatis (190). 
• WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections (191).
• Laboratory diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections including human immunodeficiency 
virus (192).
• Global progress report on HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, 2021 (193).
Definition
Chlamydial urogenital infection is an STI caused by certain biovars of the bacterium 
Chlamydia trachomatis.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
231
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Chlamydial urogenital infection
Sexually transmitted infection • Page 1 of 2
•See WHO guidance “Laboratory diagnosis of sexually
transmitted infections”
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/85343
•: all patients with suspected chlamydialImportant
urogenital infection should also be tested for
gonococcal infection (as symptoms overlap) and other
STIs (e.g. HIV, syphilis)
Usually not needed
Imaging
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by certain strains of
the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis
De/g246nition
For Chlamydial ocular infections (Trachoma) see separate
infographic
Usually not needed
Other LaboratoryTests
Clinical Presentation
•Most persons remain asymptomatic though they can still
transmit the infection
•If symptoms occur they overlap with those of gonococcal
infection (co-infection possible and common)
Most common symptoms:
•: acute urethritis with “clear”urethral discharge andIn men
dysuria
•: vaginal discharge, dyspareunia (painfulIn women
intercourse), and dysuria
•:Additionally in both sexes
-S ymptoms of acute proctitis with pain, pruritus, anal
discharge and bleeding
•Symptoms of lymphogranuloma venereum (men>women):
- Ulcerative lesion or a papule usually on the genitalia or
rectum and inguinal or femoral lymphadenopathy
(usually unilateral)
-O ften the lesion remains unnoticed in women or when
located in the rectum
Diagnosis
Reference standard:
•Nucleic acid ampli/g246cation test (a test for bothChlamydia
and is available)Neisseria gonorrhoeae
-S amples that can be used: urine (lower sensitivity and
speci/g246city in women), urethral, vulvovaginal,
endocervical or anorectal samples collected with a swab
-P erform genovar testing forChlamydia
lymphogranuloma venereum in anorectal samples of
men who have sex with men
Other tests to consider:
•Microscopy (Gram stain)
-I n a symptomatic patient, it can be used to exclude
(therefore suggesting non-Neisseria gonorrhoeae
gonococcal urethritis)
-L eukocytes are usually present but not a speci/g246c/g246nding
for chlamydial infection
•Culture: if symptoms persist despite adequate treatment
(but it is rarely performed)
•Note: urines are not good specimens for microscopy and
culture
Microbiology Tests
In general this guidance applies to adults and young people aged
over 12 years. In children, specialist advice should be sought where
possible. Consideration should be given that an STI in a child may be
due to child sexual abuse
Chlamydiatrachomatisis an intracellularGram-negative bacterium;
strainsassociatedwith urogenitalinfection are mostlygenitaltract
biovars(serovarsDt oK ) and rarelylymphogranulomavenereum
biovar(serovarsL1, L2, L3)
Pathogen
Important elements of prevention include:
•Sexuality education
•Promoting consistent use of condoms
•Pre- and post-test counselling
•Safe sex and risk reduction counselling
•Interventions targeting high-risk groups
Prevention
Important:
•Sexual partners should be informed of the disease and
treated
•Reporting of this infection to health authorities is
encouraged according to local regulations
232
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Chlamydial urogenital infection
Sexually transmitted infection • Page 2 of 2
All dosages are for normal renal function
Anorectal Infection
Doxycycline 100 mg q12h ORAL
Treatment duration: 7 days
All dosages are for normal renal function
Infection in PregnantW omen
Azithromycin 1 g ORAL
Treatment duration: single dose
Clinical Considerations
Treatment is always indicated when infection is diagnosed,
including in asymptomatic persons because they can
transmit the infection to others
Treatment
Since treatment duration varies according to the antibiotic
used, please refer to the corresponding antibiotic section for
treatment duration
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Treatment is aligned with the WHO 2016 guidelines for
chlamydial urogenital infections
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/246165) and
the WHO 2021 guidelines for the management of
symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/342523) but
only options listed in the 2021 EML are reported
All dosages are for normal renal function
Lymphogranuloma Venereum
Doxycycline 100 mg q12h ORAL
Treatment duration: 21 days
All dosages are for normal renal function
Uncomplicated Urogenital Infection
Doxycycline 100 mg q12h ORAL
Treatment duration: 7 days
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Recent data suggest that doxycycline is more effective than
azithromycin, therefore it could be given priority if adherence
is not a concern (except in pregnant women where it is
contraindicated)
Azithromycin 1 g ORAL
Treatment duration: single dose
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book233
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Pathogen
Chlamydial urogenital infection is caused by Chlamydia trachomatis , an intracellular 
Gram-negative bacterium. There are several strains of Chlamydia trachomatis and not all 
are associated with STI (see the chapter on trachoma). Chlamydial urogenital infections 
associated with STI are caused mostly by genital tract biovars (serovars D to K) and, more rarely, 
lymphogranuloma venereum biovar (serovars L1, L2, L3). Lymphogranuloma venereum is 
an ulcerative disease extending to regional lymph nodes (often the inguinal and anorectal 
area) and is more common in men (see the paragraph on lymphogranuloma venereum later 
in this chapter). This disease is endemic in many tropical and sub-tropical regions; in other 
settings, the infection is most commonly seen among men who have sex with men.
Pathophysiology
Chlamydia trachomatis infects the mucosa of the urogenital tract during sexual contact 
and produces a local inflammatory response that causes vaginal, urethral or anal discharge. 
Invasive infections caused by more invasive serovars of Chlamydia trachomatis can also 
spread to regional lymph nodes.
Epidemiology
Chlamydial urogenital infection is one of the most common STIs worldwide, including in 
low-income settings where it is probably under-reported (194,195). Young sexually active 
adults are at particularly high risk. Undiagnosed and untreated, chlamydial urogenital 
infections can lead to complications such as pelvic inflammatory disease (infection of the 
upper female reproductive tract), ectopic pregnancy and infertility in women (196,197). 
Maternal infection can cause serious health problems to the child, such as preterm birth, low 
birth weight or conjunctivitis. The 2021 WHO global progress report on HIV, viral hepatitis 
and STIs reported an estimated 128 million new chlamydial infections in 2020 among adults 
aged 15 to 49 years (193).
Clinical presentation
Signs and symptoms of chlamydial infection mostly overlap with those of gonococcal infection.
In most cases, the infection is asymptomatic, and it is therefore impossible to determine how 
long a person has been infected. Even in the absence of symptoms, infected individuals can 
transmit the infection.
When symptoms occur (usually 1–2 weeks after being infected), particularly in men, the 
most common clinical presentation is acute urethritis characterized by profuse usually 
clear urethral discharge and dysuria. Most women with chlamydial cervical infection are
234The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
asymptomatic. The ones who may be symptomatic have vaginal discharge, dyspareunia 
(painful intercourse) and dysuria. Some women may have lower abdominal pain or pelvic 
tenderness because of ascending infection, causing pelvic inflammatory disease.
In both sexes (but in males more than females), symptoms of acute proctitis with pain, pruritus, 
discharge and bleeding of the rectum may occur. Pharyngitis (mostly manifesting as a mild 
sore throat) and conjunctivitis are other conditions that usually coexist with genital infection.
Lymphogranuloma venereum is characterized by inguinal or femoral lymphadenopathy 
(usually unilateral) with or without an associated primary lesion. The classic lesion is a 
transient, ulcerative lesion or a papule usually located on the genitalia or rectum. In many 
cases, the lesion may remain unnoticed; for example, the infection may be completely 
asymptomatic in women when located on the cervix or can sometimes present with 
symptoms of acute urethritis in men. Rectal exposure can cause proctitis with pain, pruritus, 
discharge and bleeding of the rectum.
Laboratory tests
Patient microbiology tests
Molecular testing has greatly improved the detection of Chlamydia trachomatis (and 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae ) among both symptomatic and asymptomatic men and women. 
Molecular testing has become the recommended reference standard technology to 
diagnose and screen populations for Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae . 
Table 19.1 indicates the types of specimens that can be used for this purpose.
For more comprehensive information on the diagnosis of chlamydial infection, please refer 
to the most recent (2013) WHO guideline for the laboratory diagnosis of STIs (192). Please 
check the WHO website regularly for possible updates.
Patients with chlamydial urogenital infection should be offered testing for HIV and other 
STIs, such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, gonococcal infection and syphilis. Test of cure (i.e. 
testing after the end of treatment) could be considered in pregnant women 3–4 weeks 
after the end of treatment.
Tests to consider when chlamydial infection is suspected are listed in Table 19.1. Additional 
tests for other STIs that could be considered when chlamydial urogenital infection is 
confirmed or suspected are shown in Table 19.2. Surveillance, including etiologic studies of 
STI syndromes, will be important to inform local and national guidance. 
If symptoms persist at review, partner notification and treatment history should be checked. 
People with recurrent or persistent infection should be referred to a centre with laboratory 
capacity to diagnose Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Chlamydia trachomatis, Mycoplasma genitalium 
and Trichomonas vaginalis and to test for antibiotic-resistant Neisseria gonorrhoeae and 
Mycoplasma genitalium.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book235
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Table 19.1 – Microbiology tests to consider when chlamydial infection is suspected 
as indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where 
the test should 
be available
Qualitative test for Chlamydia trachomatis and 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae infections (i.e. nucleic 
acid amplification test)a,b
This is the recommended reference 
standard
To diagnose chlamydial 
and/or gonorrhoeal 
urogenital disease and 
extragenital infection
Health care 
facilities 
with clinical 
laboratories
Microscopy (Gram stain)c
Gram stain of vaginal and urethral discharge 
will usually show the presence of leukocytes 
(> 10 leukocytes/high power field for urethral 
discharge and > 20 leukocytes/high power 
field for vaginal discharge) but this finding 
is not specific for chlamydial infections. If 
carried out by an experienced person, a Gram 
stain negative for intracellular diplococci 
(Neisseria gonorrhoeae is an intracellular 
diplococcus) with the presence of > 5 
leukocytes/high power field in the context of 
urethral discharge in a man can be presumed 
to suggest non-gonococcal urethritis.
To assess microbial 
morphology, and 
presence or absence of 
white blood cells
Health care 
facilities 
with clinical 
laboratories
Culturec,d and antimicrobial susceptibility 
testing (rarely performed)
Initial step to detect 
and identify bacterial 
species for selection of 
appropriate antibiotic 
regimens
Health care 
facilities 
with clinical 
laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics.
a Usually chlamydial and gonococcal infections are tested at the same time since their clinical presentations are 
very similar.
b Possible specimens among women, are a vulvovaginal specimen, which may be self-collected. An endocervical 
swab can also be an alternative but requires a speculum. First-catch urine is another option, but the sensitivity and 
specificity tend to be lower in women. Among men, possible specimens are first-catch urine or urethral swabs. 
Anorectal and pharyngeal samples are also adequate. For anorectal samples among men who have sex with men, 
Chlamydia genovar testing for lymphogranuloma venereum should be done to guide the appropriate treatment 
regimen for this condition.
c Possible specimens are urethral swabs, endocervical swabs, vaginal swabs, rectal swabs, oropharyngeal swabs 
and conjunctival swabs. Note. Urine samples are not good specimens for microscopy and culture.
d Consider culture if symptoms persist despite adequate treatment: note, urine samples are not good specimens 
for culture. Processing Chlamydia trachomatis for culture requires highly experienced laboratories and technicians 
and is too complex, laborious and time-consuming to be of economic value. It is rarely performed in middle- or 
high-income countries nowadays except for special purposes.
236The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Table 19.2 – Additional tests for other sexually transmitted infections to consider 
in patients with confirmed or suspected chlamydial urogenital infection as 
indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where 
the test should be 
available
Gonorrhoea Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae NAAT
To diagnose 
gonorrhoeal 
urogenital disease 
and extragenital 
infection
Health care facilities 
with clinical 
laboratories
HIV Anti-HIV-1 and -HIV-
2 antibody (RDT)
Self-testing to 
screen for HIV
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa
HIV Anti-HIV-1 and -HIV-
2 antibody (RDT and 
immunoassay)
To screen for HIV 
infection
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care 
facilities with 
clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
HIV Combined 
anti-HIV-1/HIV-2 
antibody and p24 
antigen (RDT and 
immunoassay)
To screen for HIV 
infection
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care 
facilities with 
clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Hepatitis B Hepatitis B virus 
surface antigen 
(RDT, immunoassay)
To screen for 
acute and chronic 
hepatitis B virus 
infection in people 
aged > 12 months
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care 
facilities with 
clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book237
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Table 19.2 continued
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where 
the test should be 
available
Hepatitis B IgM-specific 
antibodies 
to hepatitis B 
core antigen 
(immunoassay)
To aid in the 
diagnosis of acute 
HBV infection in the 
context of outbreak 
investigation
Health care 
facilities with 
clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Hepatitis C Anti-hepatitis C 
antibody (RDT, 
immunoassay)
To screen for 
hepatitis C virus 
infection in people 
aged > 18 months
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care 
facilities with 
clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Syphilis Antibodies to 
Treponema pallidumb 
(RDT)
To diagnose or 
help to diagnose 
Treponema pallidum
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa
Syphilis and HIV 
(combined test)
Combined 
antibodies to 
Treponema pallidum 
and to HIV-1 and 
HIV-2 (RDT)
To diagnose or help 
to diagnose HIV 
and/or Treponema 
pallidum
Community 
settings and health 
facilities without 
laboratoriesa
Trichomoniasis Microscopy To assess microbial 
morphology, 
and presence or 
absence of white 
blood cells
Health care facilities 
with clinical 
laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; NAAT: nucleic acid 
amplification test; RDT: rapid diagnostic test.
a Community and health settings without laboratories are facilities such as health posts and centres, doctors’ 
offices, outreach clinics and ambulatory care. These tests are assumed to be available at health care facilities with 
laboratories.
b Usually, a non-treponemal test (e.g. rapid plasma reagin, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test) is used for 
screening. Please refer to the chapter on syphilis for more details on testing.
238The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Other tests
When chlamydial urogenital infection is suspected, laboratory tests other than microbiology 
are not usually needed. 
Using microbiology surveillance data
Targeted surveillance may be helpful to inform treatment policies.
Imaging
When chlamydial urogenital infection is suspected, imaging is not usually needed.
Antibiotic treatment
Antibiotic treatment is always indicated when the infection is diagnosed. Table 19.3 gives 
recommendations taken from the 2016 WHO guidelines on the treatment of chlamydial 
infections (190) and the 2021 WHO guidelines on the management of symptomatic STIs 
(191). Please check the WHO website regularly for possible updates. Recommendations in the 
EML overlap with the WHO guidelines (azithromycin or doxycycline are the recommended 
treatment options) but fewer treatment alternatives are included in the EML (8).
If symptoms persist at review:
• check partner notification and treatment history; and
• for people with recurrent or persistent urethral discharge, refer to a centre with 
laboratory capacity to diagnose Neisseria gonorrhoeae , Chlamydia trachomatis, 
Mycoplasma genitalium and Trichomonas vaginalis and test for antibiotic-resistant 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and Mycoplasma genitalium.
Prevention
Important elements of prevention include counselling and behavioural approaches 
including comprehensive sexuality education, pre- and post-test counselling, safe sex 
and risk reduction counselling and promoting consistent use of condoms. Interventions 
targeting high-risk groups (e.g. men who have sex with men, transgender people, sex 
workers, people who inject drugs) may be considered. Also consider offering pre-exposure 
prophylaxis for HIV to people at high risk of HIV infection. Sexual partners should always be 
informed of the infection and treated (189). Reporting of this infection to health authorities 
according to local regulations should also be done.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book239
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Table 19.3 – Antibiotic treatment for chlamydial urogenital infections as indicated in 
the most recent WHO guidelines (190,191)
Please check the WHO website regularly for possible updates
Type of chlamydial 
infection
Treatment Total treatment 
duration
Uncomplicated urogenital 
infectiona
 Doxycycline b (oral): 100 mg given 
every 12 hours
OR
 Azithromycin (oral): 1g
7 days 
(doxycycline) 
Single dose 
(azithromycin)
Anorectal infectionc Doxycycline (oral): 100 mg given 
every 12 hours
7 days
Infection in pregnant 
womend
 Azithromycin (oral): 1g Single dose
Lymphogranuloma 
venereume
 Doxycycline (oral): 100 mg given 
every 12 hours
21 days
Ophthalmia neonatorumf (i.e. 
chlamydial conjunctivitis)
 Azithromycin (oral): 20 mg/kg given 
once a day
3 days
Ocular prophylaxisg (topical 
treatment for the prevention 
of both gonococcal and 
chlamydial ophthalmia 
neonatorum)
 Erythromycin (eye ointment): 0.5% Antibiotic needs 
to be applied to 
both eyes soon 
after birth (single 
dose)
EML: Model List of Essential Medicines; EMLc: Model List of Essential Medicines for children.
Note. All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
a Alternatives indicated in the 2021 WHO guidelines but not included the WHO EML for this indication are: 
erythromycin (oral): 500 mg every 6 hours; ofloxacin (oral): 200–400 mg every 12 hours. The recommended 
duration of treatment is 7 days for both options. 
b According to recent data, doxycycline is more effective than azithromycin and could be given priority if adherence 
to treatment is not a concern (198–200). The 2021 WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually 
transmitted infections recommend doxycycline as the first-line option and azithromycin as an effective substitute 
(191). Therefore, exceptionally in this case, alternative antibiotic options are not presented in alphabetical order and 
doxycycline is mentioned first in the Table.
c Alternatives indicated in the 2021 WHO guidelines but not included in the EML for this indication are: erythromycin 
(oral): 500 mg every 6 hours. The recommended duration of treatment is 14 days.
d Alternatives indicated in the 2021 WHO guidelines but not included in the EML for this indication are: erythromycin 
(oral): 500 mg every 6 hours. The recommended duration of treatment is 7 days.
continues
240The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
19. Sexually transmitted infections – chlamydial urogenital infection
Table 19.3 continued
e Alternatives indicated in the 2021 WHO guidelines but not included in the EML for this indication are: erythromycin 
(oral): 500 mg every 6 hours. The recommended duration of treatment is 21 days.
f Alternatives indicated in the 2016 WHO guidelines but not included in the EMLc for this indication are: 
erythromycin (oral): 50 mg/kg per day divided in 4 doses for 14 days.
g Alternatives indicated in the 2016 WHO guidelines but not included the EMLc for this indication are: tetracycline 
hydrochloride (eye ointment) 1%; povidone–iodine (water-based solution. Do not use alcohol-based solutions) 
2.5%; silver nitrate (solution) 1%; chloramphenicol (eye ointment) 1%.
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 3.2.5 Inguinal Swelling (Bubo) | p.352-354 | audience=general] ---
It is an STI syndrome presenting as localised swellings or enlarged lymph
glands in the groin and femoral area.
Causes
~ Chlamydia strains: lymphogranuloma venerium (LGV)
~ Heamophilus ducreyi: chancroid
~ Treponema pallidum: syphilis
Clinical features
~ Excessively swollen inguinal glands
~ Pain, tenderness
~ Swellings may become fluctuant if pus forms
Differential diagnosis
~ Other causes of swollen inguinal lymph nodes, e.g. leg ulcer
~ Obstructed inguinal hernia
Investigations
- As for Genital Ulcers
- C&S of pus
286
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
Patient complains of inguinal swelling
If genital ulcer is present
Treat as genital ulcer
If no improvement Refer for specialist’s management
If buboes persist, check to see if partner
was treated. If partner not treated
Continue with Doxycycline 100 mg 12
hourly for 14 days or Erythromycin 500
mg every 6 hours for 14 days.
Inguinal/femoral buboes
present and no ulcer
Give Doxycycline 100 mg 12 hourly for 14 days.
Treat partner. If partner pregnant, instead of Doxycycline give Erythromycin 500 mg every 6 hours
for 14 days. Do not incise bubo. Aspirate through
normal skin with a large bore needle gauge <20
every 2 days until resolution.
Take history and examine for genital
ulcers, rule out infection of the foot, leg
or buttock and exclude inguinal hernia
287
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- Examine for genital ulcers, rule out infection of the foot,
leg or buttock and exclude inguinal hernia
- If genital ulcer is present, treat as per above protocol
- Give doxycycline 100 mg 12 hourly for 14 days
- Treat partner
If partner is pregnant
- Give erythromycin 500 mg every 6 hours for 14 days
If bubo persisting, and partner was not treated
- Continue treatment for 14 days
If not improving
- Refer for specialist management
HC2
HC3
Caution
- Do not incise bubo. Aspirate through normal skin with a large
bore needle gauge <20 every 2 days until resolution
- Alternative to doxycycline: azithromycin 1 g single dose
