# TOPIC: sti_syphilis

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 21. Sexually transmitted infections - syphilis | p.270-286 | audience=general] ---
254The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections 
– syphilis
Note
In general this chapter applies to adults and young people older than 12 years. In children, 
specialist advice should be sought where possible. Consideration should be given that an STI in 
a child may be due to child sexual abuse.
Key messages
• Syphilis has several stages of infection with different clinical presentations and remains 
common worldwide.
• All pregnant women should be screened for syphilis and treated if infected to prevent 
congenital syphilis in the child.
• Asymptomatic people should also be treated because they can transmit the infection to 
others, and all people with syphilis should also be evaluated for other sexually transmitted 
infections.
• Preventive services should be offered (e.g. condoms, brief sexuality education, HIV preexposure prophylaxis to people at high risk for HIV infection) and sexual partners should be 
informed and treated.
• Reporting of this infection to health authorities is encouraged according to local regulations.
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) – fact sheets (189).
• Global progress report on HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, 2021 (193).
• WHO guidelines for the treatment of Treponema pallidum (syphilis) (210).
• WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections (191).
• Laboratory diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections including human immunodeficiency 
virus (192).
• WHO guideline on syphilis screening and treatment for pregnant women (211).
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book255
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Definition
Syphilis is an STI caused by the bacterium Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum. Syphilis 
is one of other treponematoses, that is, diseases caused by spirochaetes of the species 
Treponema pallidum . Other Treponema pallidum subspecies causing human diseases 
include subspecies pertenue, the causative pathogen of yaws (212), subspecies endemicum, 
the causative pathogen of endemic syphilis or bejel, and subspecies carateum, the causative 
pathogen of pinta (213). This chapter will only address disease caused by Treponema pallidum 
subspecies pallidum (syphilis). Information about other treponematoses is available on the 
WHO website (212).
Syphilis can be classified as early or late based on the time since becoming infected. 
Usually infections of ≤ 2 years duration are defined as early and infections of > 2 years are 
defined as late. Furthermore, infections can be classified as primary, secondary or tertiary 
based on the clinical presentation (210). There is usually a long latent phase with no clinical 
manifestations between secondary and tertiary infection; the tertiary phase only develops 
in untreated or inadequately treated infections. Overlap between these definitions exists, 
with early infection including primary and secondary syphilis and late infection including 
the latent phase and tertiary syphilis. 
The latent phase can also be divided into two phases – early latent and late latent. 
Early latent syphilis is usually defined as infection of < 2 years, whereas late latent syphilis is 
defined as the presence of the disease of ≥ 2 years (210). However, this distinction is difficult 
to apply because it is often impossible to establish the time of the initial infection.
256
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Syphilis
Sexually transmitted infection • Page 1 of 2
•S ee WHO guidance “Laborator y diagnosis of sexually
transmitted infec tions ”
https://apps .who .int/iris/handle/10665/85343
•: all patients with suspec ted syphilisImportant
should also be tested for other STIs (e .g . HIV ,
gonococcal infec tion)
Clinical Presentation
Early syphilis:
•: Oft en asymptomatic, localized nonPrimary infection
painful ulcerativ e lesion with indurated margins (usually on
genitalia, mouth or re c tum) +/- local lymphadenopath y
•:Secondary infection
-S k in and mucosal manifestations ov er trunk and
ex tr emities including palms of hands and soles of f eet
-R ash is commonly maculopapular and non-irritan t
- Mucous membranes of mouth/perineum can show lesions
-F ev er (≥ 38.0 °C ), generalized lymphadenopath y and
malaise usually pr esen t
-M eningitis , hepatitis and ocular in v olv ement can occur
Late syphilis:
•: Can affec t differ ent organ systemsTertiary infection
-C ar diovascular system: usually aor titis
-S k in/soft tissues/bones: nodular lesions (gummas)
-C entral ner v ous system: often pr ogr essiv e dementia,
psy chiatric symptoms , pr oblems with coor dination of
mov ements
Diagnosis
Direct detection methods:
•C an detec t the pathogen in specimens fr om sk in or tissue
lesions
Serological tests:
•: detec t antibodies to tr eponemalTreponemal tests
antigens; they usually r emain positiv e after infec tion ev en
with successful tr eatmen t
-T ype of tests: ,,FTA-ABS TPPA TPHA
•: det ec t antibodies that r eac t to lipidsNontreponemal tests
r eleased in r esponse to cellular damage caused by infec tion;
usually become negativ e with successful tr eatmen t
-T ype of tests: ,VDRL RPR
•A ll tests ar e negativ e initially in primar y infec tion
•Both treponemal and non-treponemal tests need to be
positive to con/g246rm the diagnosis
•T o incr ease access and same -d ay treatment, a rapid
tr eponemal test follow ed (if positiv e) by a nontr eponemal
test is re commended; but star ting with a non-tr eponemal
test and con/g246rming positiv e r esults with a tr eponemal test
is also appr opriate
Microbiology Tests
Primary syphilis: Usually not needed
Secondary or tertiary syphilis: May be r equir ed
depending on the clinical pr esentation
Other LaboratoryTests
Usually not needed unless a complication of late
syphilis is suspec te d
Imaging
In general this guidance applies to adults and young people aged
over 12 years. In children, specialist advice should be sought where
possible. Consideration should be given that an STI in a child may be
due to child sexual abuse
Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum is a bac terium of the
ph ylum Spir ochaetes
•Slow gr owing , difficult to cultur e, thinin vitro
Pathogen
•A sexually transmitted infec tion (STI) caused by the bac terium
Treponema pallidum pallidumsubspecies
•T he infec tion can be transmitted fr om the mother to her fetus
because the pathogen can cr oss the placenta
Classi/g246cation based on:
•T iming since acquisition
-: ≤2 y ears (includes primar y and secondar y infec tionsEarly
and the early latent phase)
-: >2 y ears (includes the late latent phase and ter tiar yLate
infec tions)
•Clinical pr esentation (see below)
De/g246nition
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
257
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Syphilis
Sexually transmitted infection • Page 2 of 2
Treatment
All dosages are for normal renal function
Early Syphilis
Important elements of prevention include:
•Sexuality education
•Promoting consistent use of condoms
•Pre- and post-test counselling
•Safe sex and risk reduction counselling
•Interventions targeting high risk groups
•Access of pregnant women to early and adequate prenatal care
to prevent congenital syphilis
Prevention
Important:
•Sexual partners should be informed of the disease and
treated
•Reporting of this infection to health authorities is
encouraged according to local regulations
Since treatment duration varies according to the antibiotic
used and the stage of the infection, please refer to the
corresponding antibiotic section for treatment duration
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Clinical Considerations
•Treatment is always indicated when infection is
diagnosed, including in asymptomatic patients because
they can transmit the infection to others
•In early syphilis (primary/secondary), partners should also
be treated if exposed within 90 days
•Assess serological response by repeating non-treponemal
test to detect a reduction in titer; a 4-fold reduction in titers
con/g246rms adequate response (repeat 3, 6 and 12 months
after the end of treatment)
Treatment is aligned with the WHO 2016 guidelines for
the treatment of Treponema pallidum
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/249572) and
the WHO 2021 guidelines for the management of
symptomatic sexually transmitted infections
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/342523) but
only options listed in the 2021 EML are reported below
Procaine benzylpenicillin 1.2 million IU
(1.2 g) q24h IM
Treatment duration: 14 days
---------------------- ----------------------COMBINED WITH
All dosages are for normal renal function
Neurosyphilis
Benzylpenicillin 2-4 million IU (1.2-2.4 g) q4h IV
Treatment duration: 14 days
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Probenecid 500 mg q6h ORAL
Treatment duration: 14 days
First Choice
Benzathine benzylpenicillin 2.4 million IU
(≈ 1.8 g) IM
Treatment duration: single dose
Second Choice
Procaine benzylpenicillin 1.2 million IU (1.2 g)
q24h IM
Treatment duration: 10-14 days
All dosages are for normal renal function
Syphilis in Pregnancy
Benzathine benzylpenicillin 2.4 million IU
(≈ 1.8 g) IM
Treatment duration:
•Early Syphilis: Single dose
•Late or Unknown Stage Syphilis: One dose per
week for 3 consecutive weeks (total of 3
administrations, the interval between doses
should not exceed 14 days)
All dosages are for normal renal function
Late or Unknown Stage Syphilis
First Choice
Benzathine benzylpenicillin 2.4 million IU
(≈ 1.8 g) IM
Treatment duration: One dose per week for 3
consecutive weeks (total of 3 administrations,
the interval between doses should not exceed
14 days)
Second Choice
Procaine benzylpenicillin 1.2 million IU (1.2 g)
q24h IM
Treatment duration: 20 days
258The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Pathogen
Syphilis is caused by Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum, a bacterium of the phylum 
Spirochaetes; other members of this phylum include Leptospira and Borrelia. 
Treponema pallidum is characterized by slow growth, difficulty in culturing in vitro, 
and its thinness – 0.2 μm compared to about 0.5 μm for a bacterium like Escherichia coli – 
which makes it difficult to see with conventional microscopy.
Resistance to penicillin has not yet been reported and therefore it remains the 
antibiotic of choice for the treatment of syphilis. Resistance to azithromycin has been 
reported in some settings (214).
Pathophysiology
Syphilis is usually acquired through sexual contact with infectious lesions on the mucosa or 
skin or, much more rarely, through the bloodstream. The infection can also be transmitted 
from the mother to her fetus because Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum can cross 
the placenta and cause fetal death and congenital infection.
With sexual transmission, once Treponema pallidum subspecies pallidum enters the 
subcutaneous tissue, infection develops within 2–6 weeks (usually about 3 weeks) with 
formation of an ulcerative lesion that occurs at the site of inoculation. Usually, the immune 
system is able to control the early infection and, even if left untreated, the primary ulcerative 
lesion (i.e. chancre) resolves. However, dissemination of Treponema pallidum through the 
bloodstream can occur at the time of primary infection and this can result over time in 
secondary or tertiary syphilis in the absence of adequate treatment. In particular, tertiary 
syphilis has a long incubation period (up to years or decades after the initial infection) and 
develops in about a third of patients with untreated syphilis. In 2017, 370 000 prevalent cases 
of tertiary syphilis were reported worldwide but this number is probably an underestimation 
of the true burden of the disease (44).
Congenital syphilis can occur as a result of vertical transmission of the pathogen 
from an infected mother to the fetus. The risk of transmission depends on a combination of 
factors, including maternal titres of non-treponemal tests (see Table 21.1 for an explanation 
about tests), timing, adequacy of maternal treatment and stage of maternal infection. The 
estimated total number of cases of congenital syphilis worldwide in 2016 was 661 000, or 
473 per 100 000 live births (215).
Epidemiology
Syphilis is a common curable STI and its incidence is increasing globally. WHO estimates 
there were 7 million new cases in 2020 (193). Other bacterial STIs occur more frequently, for
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book259
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
example, in 2020 more than 82 million new cases of gonorrhoea and about 128 million new 
cases of chlamydial infection were reported (193). However, syphilis has an important public 
health impact because of the potential serious consequences if left untreated, including 
maternal transmission to the fetus resulting in congenital syphilis and fetal death, and 
complications such as neurosyphilis and cardiovascular syphilis.
Moreover, as with other STIs, syphilis affects quality of life and increases the risk 
of transmitting or acquiring other STIs including HIV infection. This HIV risk is of particular 
concern because STIs characterized by the presence of ulcerative lesions have the highest 
risk of HIV transmission (216).
The risk factors for syphilis include: having multiple sexual partners or a new sexual 
partner; having partners with STIs; having had a previous STI; and several socioeconomic factors, 
such as low socioeconomic or educational level, substance abuse and young age (217,218). 
Lack of access to adequate prenatal care is an important risk factor for congenital syphilis.
Clinical presentation
Signs and symptoms of syphilis vary depending on the stage of the disease, early or late.
Early syphilis has the following signs and symptoms.
• Primary infection (localized disease). This is characterized by the presence of a 
localized non-painful ulcerative lesion (i.e. chancre) with indurated margins, 
usually associated with local lymphadenopathy. The lesion is usually located on 
the genitalia, mouth or rectum but other locations are possible depending on the 
site of inoculation. The lesion is often asymptomatic and can remain unnoticed, 
particularly among women. If left untreated, the lesion usually resolves within a 
few weeks without leaving a scar.
• Secondary infection (disseminated disease). This is characterized by skin and 
mucosal manifestations. Generally, a maculopapular non-irritant rash appears 
which is usually diffuse and extends bilaterally over the trunk and the extremities. 
A characteristic feature is the involvement of the palms of the hands and soles 
of the feet. The mucous membranes of the mouth and perineum can also show 
lesions (mostly flat lesions) that are highly infectious. Systemic manifestations (e.g. 
fever ≥ 38.0 °C, generalized lymphadenopathy and malaise) are usually present. 
Neurological manifestations (e.g. meningitis), hepatitis and ocular involvement 
can also occur in this phase.
Late syphilis has the following signs and symptoms.
• Tertiary syphilis (disseminated disease). This can occur as the result of an untreated 
early syphilis after a period of latency, with no clinical manifestations, that may last
260The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
years. Usually tertiary syphilis develops more rapidly in patients with HIV. In this 
phase, different organ systems can be affected, particularly: the cardiovascular 
system (typically with signs and symptoms of aortitis); the skin, soft tissues and 
bones (typically with granulomatous or nodular lesions also known as gummas); 
and the central nervous system (typically with symptoms of progressive dementia, 
psychiatric syndrome and tabes dorsalis, which is characterized by problems with 
coordination of movements, pain radiating from the spine and impaired response 
of the pupils to light).
Congenital syphilis infection during pregnancy can lead to spontaneous abortion or 
premature birth. Most babies with congenital syphilis are asymptomatic at birth but when 
symptoms are present, they usually develop days or weeks after birth. These symptoms often 
include anaemia, thrombocytopenia, rash (maculopapular, desquamative rash particularly 
over the palms, soles, mouth and anus), generalized lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly and 
jaundice, nasal discharge (that may turn bloody), painful osteitis (mostly in long bones) and 
teeth abnormalities. The cerebrospinal fluid is abnormal, indicating neurological disease, in 
up to half of all babies. Of note, neurological consequences can be expressed later in life and 
this should always be considered with congenital syphilis.
Laboratory tests 
For more comprehensive information on diagnosis of syphilis, please refer to the most 
recent (2013) WHO guideline for the laboratory diagnosis of STIs (192). Please check the 
WHO website regularly for possible updates.
Patient microbiology tests
In patients with suspected syphilis, microbiology tests can support the diagnosis (Table 
21.1). Certain microbiology tests are also used to screen asymptomatic pregnant women. 
For screening during pregnancy, please refer to the most recent (2017) WHO guideline on 
syphilis screening and treatment for pregnant women (211).
Direct detection methods 
These methods can be used to detect the pathogen in specimens obtained from skin or 
tissues lesions (Table 21.1). Direct detection methods include: dark-field microscopy where 
Treponema pallidum from lesions of primary syphilis can be observed (of note, a negative 
dark-field result does not exclude syphilis); and nucleic acid amplification tests to detect 
DNA sequences specific to Treponema pallidum. Direct detection is considered the gold 
standard but it is much less frequently used today because it is more time-consuming than 
serological tests.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book261
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Serological tests
Two types of serological test can be used, treponemal and non-treponemal. 
• Treponemal tests detect antibodies to treponemal antigens and usually remain 
positive after infection even after successful treatment. These tests include: 
fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption test; Treponema pallidum particle 
agglutination assay; and Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay. Treponemal 
rapid diagnostic tests for syphilis are available and prequalified by WHO.
• Non-treponemal tests detect antibodies that react to lipids, for example, 
cardiolipin released during cellular damage that occurs in response to Treponema 
pallidum. These are qualitative and quantitative tests that can also be used to 
monitor response to treatment because their titres tend to decline after adequate 
treatment and may become negative (i.e. non-reactive) over time. These tests 
include: rapid plasma reagin test and Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test.
Initially, a two-step approach is used to test for syphilis and both types of tests – 
treponemal and non-treponemal – need to be positive to confirm the diagnosis. In order to 
increase access to testing and ensure same-day treatment, WHO recommends the use of a 
rapid treponemal test followed (if positive) by a non-treponemal test. 
However, starting with a non-treponemal test and confirmation of positive results 
with a treponemal test is also appropriate. 
All serological tests for syphilis (non-treponemal and treponemal tests) are negative 
in the early phase of primary syphilis and take 1–4 weeks after the chancre appears to 
become reactive. Both treponemal and non-treponemal tests are reactive in secondary or 
tertiary syphilis.
Non-treponemal tests can rarely give false positive results, for example, during 
pregnancy or during an acute febrile illness. Figure 21.1 and Figure 21.2 and Table 21.2 can 
be used to help with the interpretation of the results of serological tests.
Additional tests for other STIs that could be considered when syphilis is confirmed 
or suspected are shown in Table 21.3.
262The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.1 – Microbiology tests to consider when syphilis is suspected as indicated 
in the WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Microscopy of specimens 
obtained from skin and 
tissues lesionsa
To assess microbial morphology Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Antibodies to Treponema 
pallidum (RDT)
To diagnose or help to diagnose 
Treponema pallidum
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesb
Combined antibodies to 
Treponema pallidum and to 
HIV-1 and HIV-2 (RDT)
To diagnose or help to diagnose 
HIV and/or Treponema pallidum
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesb
Non-treponemal test: rapid 
plasma reagin
To screen for syphilis and 
monitor effectiveness of 
treatment
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Non-treponemal test: VDLR 
testc
To screen for syphilis and 
monitor effectiveness of 
treatment and also to screen 
for, diagnose and confirm 
neurosyphilisc
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Treponemal test: TPHA testd To confirm syphilis and diagnose 
early and late syphilis
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Treponemal test: TPPA testd To confirm syphilis and diagnose 
early and late syphilis
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; RDT: rapid diagnostic test; 
TPHA: Treponema pallidum haemagglutination; TPPA: Treponema pallidum particle agglutination; VDRL: Venereal 
Disease Research Laboratory.
a Nucleic acid amplification tests (e.g. polymerase chain reaction) of specimens obtained from skin and tissues 
lesions could also be considered if available.
b Community and health settings without laboratories are defined as community and health facilities such as 
health posts and centres, doctors’ offices, outreach clinics and ambulatory care. These tests are also assumed to be 
available at health care facilities with laboratories.
c If neurosyphilis is suspected (this can occur at any stage of infection including in the first few months), the VDRL 
test can also be used on the cerebrospinal fluid in the presence of a positive syphilis serology. The test has a high 
specificity (i.e. few false-positive results) but a low sensitivity (i.e. many false-negative results). Examination of the 
cerebrospinal fluid is recommended where there is clinical evidence of neurological involvement. It is also highly 
desirable in all patients with syphilis of more than 2 years duration or of uncertain duration in order to evaluate the 
possible presence of asymptomatic neurosyphilis (219).
d Treponemal tests usually remain positive after the infection has been cleared.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book263
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Figure 21.1 – Reactivity of non-treponemal serological tests by stage of syphilis 
and effect of treatment
Negative
becoming
positive
Always
positive
Usually
positive
Usually
positive
Usually
positive
but becoming
negative
Becoming
negative
Becoming
negative
Result
unchanged
Untreated
Successfully
treated
Early Syphilis Late Syphilis
PrimaryS econdaryE arly latent Late latent Tertiary
Positive non-treponemal antibody test
Remains
positive
Negative non-treponemal antibody test
Becoming
negative
Source: Laboratory diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections including human immunodeficiency virus, 2013 (192).
Figure 21.2 – Reactivity of treponemal serological tests by stage of syphilis and 
effect of treatment
Always
positive
Always
positive
Always
positiveUntreated
Successfully
treated
Early Syphilis Late Syphilis
PrimaryS econdaryE arly latent Late latent Tertiary
Positive treponemal test Negative treponemal test
Usually
positive
eventually
becoming
negative
Negative
becoming
positive (Early)
Remains
positive
Remains
positive
Remains
positive
Result
unchanged
Remains
positive
(in initially
positive)
Source: Laboratory diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections including human immunodeficiency virus, 2013 (192).
264The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.2 – Possible interpretation of combinations of non-treponemal and 
treponemal test results
Non-treponemal 
test (RPR or VDRL)
Treponemal test (FTA-ABS, 
TPPA, TPHA, RDT)
Interpretation
Positive Positive This supports the diagnosis of 
syphilis (the stage of disease and 
need for treatment should be 
determined on a case-by-case basis).
Note. These cases should be notified 
to the local authority according 
to national guidance for disease 
notification.
Negative Positive Usually this can occur as a result 
of a successfully treated previous 
infection because treponemal tests 
tend to remain positive. Otherwise it 
could be a very early (or late) phase 
of the infection.
Positive Negative Usually this can be considered a 
false positive result (e.g. during 
pregnancy).
Negative Negative Usually the diagnosis of syphilis can 
be excluded.
FTA-ABS: fluorescent treponemal antibody absorption; RDT: rapid diagnostic test; RPR: rapid plasma reagin; TPHA: 
Treponema pallidum haemagglutination assay; TPPA: Treponema pallidum particle agglutination; VDRL: Venereal 
Disease Research Laboratory.
Table 21.3 – Additional tests for other sexually transmitted infections to consider 
in patients with confirmed or suspected syphilis as indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Chlamydial 
urogenital 
infection and 
gonococcal 
infection
Qualitative test 
for Chlamydia 
trachomatis and 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
infections (NAAT)
To diagnose 
chlamydial and/
or gonorrhoeal 
urogenital disease and 
extragenital infection
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book265
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.3 continued
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
HIV Anti-HIV-1 and -HIV-2 
antibody (RDT)
Self-testing to screen 
for HIV
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa
HIV Anti-HIV-1 and -HIV-2 
antibody (RDT and 
immunoassay)
To screen for HIV 
infection
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
HIV Combined anti-
HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody 
and p24 antigen (RDT 
and immunoassay)
To screen for HIV 
infection
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Hepatitis B Hepatitis B virus 
surface antigen (RDT, 
immunoassay
To screen for acute 
and chronic hepatitis 
B virus infection in 
people older than 12 
months
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Hepatitis B IgM-specific 
antibodies 
to hepatitis B 
core antigen 
(immunoassay)
To aid in the diagnosis 
of acute HBV infection 
in the context of 
outbreak investigation
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Hepatitis C Anti-hepatitis C 
antibody (RDT, 
immunoassay)
To screen for hepatitis 
C virus infection in 
people older than 18 
months
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
continues
266The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.3 continued
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Trichomoniasis Microscopy To assess microbial 
morphology, and 
presence or absence 
of white blood cells
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; NAAT: nucleic acid 
amplification test; RDT: rapid diagnostic test.
a Community and health settings without laboratories are defined as community and health facilities such as 
health posts and centres, doctors’ offices, outreach clinics and ambulatory care. These tests are also assumed to be 
available at health care facilities with laboratories.
Other tests
When primary syphilis is suspected, blood tests other than serology are not usually needed. 
However, in case of secondary or tertiary syphilis, laboratory tests may be required. If signs 
and symptoms of neurological disease (i.e. neurosyphilis) are present, a lumbar puncture to 
test the cerebrospinal fluid is indicated if available (Table 21.4).
Table 21.4 – Laboratory tests (other than microbiology) to consider when late 
syphilis is suspected as indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Basic CSF profile: CSF 
leukocyte counta, CSF 
differential leukocyte count 
and CSF proteinb and 
glucosec
To aid in the diagnosis of 
neurosyphilis
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
CSF: cerebrospinal fluid; EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics. 
a CSF leukocyte count: usually > 5 white blood cell/μL (> 0.005 × 10 9/L), or a higher cut-off > 20 cell/μL (> 0.02 × 
109/L) in HIV-positive patients even though these are not specific findings of neurosyphilis.
b CSF protein levels: protein concentration is usually increased (> 45 mg/dL or > 0.45 g/L) but not a specific finding 
of neurosyphilis.
c CSF glucose levels: glucose concentrations are usually decreased but not a specific finding of neurosyphilis.
Using microbiology surveillance data
Routine surveillance is not helpful to inform empiric guidance.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book267
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Imaging
When syphilis is suspected, imaging is not usually needed unless a complication of late 
syphilis is suspected.
Antibiotic treatment
All patients, including pregnant women, diagnosed with syphilis should receive a full course 
of antibiotic treatment. Serological response to treatment can be assessed by repeating a 
non-treponemal quantitative test – ideally the same type of non-treponemal test used at 
the time of diagnosis – to detect a reduction in titre. A four-fold reduction, or higher, in titres 
should be seen to confirm an adequate response to treatment for early syphilis. Usually 
assessments are repeated at 3, 6 and 12 months after the end of treatment.
In the case of early syphilis (primary or secondary), the partners of infected people 
should also be treated if they had sexual relations with the infected person in the 90 
days before the person was diagnosed with syphilis. If more than 90 days have elapsed, 
serological testing is usually suggested and treatment is given accordingly.
The antibiotic treatment recommendations reported here (Table 21.5) are aligned 
with the most recent WHO guidelines for the treatment of syphilis and for the management 
of symptomatic STIs (191,210). 
Table 21.5 – Antibiotic treatment for syphilis by stage of the disease as indicated in 
the most recent WHO guidelines for the treatment of syphilis (210)
Please check the WHO website regularly for possible updates
Type of infection Treatment Total treatment 
duration
Early syphilis (adults and 
adolescents)
Early syphilis includes 
primary, secondary and 
early latent syphilis of no 
more than 2 years duration
First choice
 Benzathine benzylpenicillin a (IM): 
2.4 million IU (≈ 1.8 g)
Second choice
 Procaine benzylpenicillin (IM): 
1.2 million IU (1.2 g) given once a day
Benzathine 
benzylpenicillin: 
single dose
Procaine 
benzylpenicillin: 
10–14 days
continues
268The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.5 continued
Type of infection Treatment Total treatment 
duration
Late syphilis or unknown 
stage (adults and 
adolescents)
This includes infection of 
more than 2 years duration 
without evidence of 
treponemal infection (i.e. 
asymptomatic infection)
First choice
 Benzathine benzylpenicillin b (IM): 
2.4 million IU (≈ 1.8 g)
Second choice
 Procaine benzylpenicillin (IM): 
1.2 million IU (1.2 g) given once a day
Benzathine 
benzylpenicillin: one 
dose per week for 3 
consecutive weeks 
(e.g. on days 1, 8 
and 15)
The interval between 
doses should not 
exceed 14 days
Procaine 
benzylpenicillin: 20 
days 
Congenital syphilis
Infants with confirmed 
disease or infants who are 
clinically normal but whose 
mother had untreated 
or inadequately treated 
syphilisc
Inadequate treatment 
refers to treatment received 
< 30 days before delivery 
and/or treatment with a 
non-penicillin regimen
 Benzylpenicillin (IV): 50 000–75 000 
IU/kg/dose (30–45 mg/kg/dose) given 
every 12 hours
OR
 Procaine benzylpenicillin (IM): 
50 000 IU/kg (50 mg/kg) given once 
a day
If IV access is available, benzylpenicillin 
is preferred over procaine 
benzylpenicillin.
10–15 days
Neurosyphilisd Benzylpenicillin e (IV): 2–4 million IU 
(1.2–2.4 g) given every 4 hours 
OR
 Procaine benzylpenicillin f (IM): 
1.2 million IU (1.2 g) given once a day 
AND Probenecid (oral): 500 mg given 
every 6 hours
14 days
continues
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book269
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.5 continued
Type of infection Treatment Total treatment 
duration
Syphilis in pregnancy Early syphilis
 Benzathine benzylpenicillin (IM): 
2.4 million IU (≈ 1.8 g)
Alternative options (not in the EML) in 
case of allergy to penicillin (or stockouts): 
Ceftriaxone 1 g for 10–14 days 
Azithromycin (2 g single dose) or 
erythromycin (500 mg every 6 hours 
for 14 days) can also be used but 
neither of them crosses the placental 
barrier completely, therefore only the 
mother is treated, not the fetus.
Late syphilis or unknown stage
 Benzathine benzylpenicillin (IM): 
2.4 million IU (≈ 1.8 g)
Alternative option (not in the EML) in 
case of allergy to penicillin (or stockouts): Erythromycin 500 mg every 6 
hours for 30 days, but this does not 
treat the fetus since erythromycin 
does not cross the placental barrier 
completely, therefore only the mother 
is treated.
Early syphilis
Single dose
Late syphilis or 
unknown stage
One dose per week 
for 3 consecutive 
weeks (e.g. on days 1, 
8 and 15). 
The interval between 
doses should not 
exceed 14 days.
EML: Model List of Essential Medicines; IM: intramuscular; IU: international units; IV: intravenous; 
Note. All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
a Alternative options in case of allergy to penicillin or stock-outs are indicated in the 2016 WHO guidelines but these 
are not included in the EML for this indication. These alternatives are doxycycline (oral) 100 mg every 12 hours 
(except in pregnant women) for 14 days, or ceftriaxone 1 g (IM) for 10–14 days (210). In special circumstances (i.e. 
when susceptibility is likely, based on local epidemiology) azithromycin 2 g (oral) as a single dose can be given. If 
penicillin cannot be used, doxycycline is the preferred choice (except in pregnant women) because of its lower cost 
and oral administration (210). 
b An alternative option, in case of allergy to penicillin or stock-outs, is indicated in the 2016 WHO guidelines but this 
option is not included in the EML for this indication. This option is doxycycline (oral) 100 mg every 12 hours (except 
in pregnant women) for 30 days (210).
c If the mother was adequately treated and the infant is clinically normal, close monitoring of the infant is suggested. 
If treatment is provided, the 2016 WHO guidelines indicate benzathine benzylpenicillin (IM) 50 000 IU/kg (37.5 mg/kg) 
per day single dose as an option.
continues
270The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
21. Sexually transmitted infections – syphilis
Table 21.5 continued
d From the 2003 WHO guidelines on management of sexually transmitted infections (219).
e Alternative options are indicated in the 2003 WHO guidelines for non-pregnant patients allergic to penicillin but 
they are not included in the EML. These options are: doxycycline (oral) 200 mg every 12 hours; and tetracycline 
(oral) 500 mg every 6 hours. Treatment duration is 30 days in both cases.
f Some authorities recommend adding benzathine benzylpenicillin 2.4 million IU (≈ 1.8 g) by IM injection, in three 
consecutive doses once weekly after completing this regimen, but there are no data to support this approach. 
Benzathine benzylpenicillin 2.4 million IU (≈ 1.8 g) by IM injection does not give adequate therapeutic levels in the 
cerebrospinal fluid (210).
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.
Prevention
Sexual transmission typically occurs only during primary, secondary and early latent 
infection. Mother-to-child transmission, however, has been documented to occur up to 
several years after the initial infection (210). 
Prevention of infection is a key strategy; no effective vaccine against Treponema 
pallidum is yet available therefore other preventive measures can be used. 
The main elements of prevention include: comprehensive sexuality education, pre- 
and post-test counselling, safe sex and risk reduction counselling, and promoting consistent 
use of condoms. Interventions targeting groups who have a higher risk of infection – for 
example, men who have sex with men, transgender people, sex workers, people who inject 
drugs, indigenous communities and people in prison – should be considered. Offering HIV 
pre-exposure prophylaxis to people at high risk of HIV infection may be considered.
Access of pregnant women to early and adequate prenatal care, including screening 
at first visit and immediate treatment initiation if needed, are key to prevent congenital syphilis.
Sexual partners should always be informed of the infection and treated (189). 
Reporting of this infection to health authorities according to local regulations should also 
be done.

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 3.2.4 Genital Ulcer Disease (GUD) Syndrome | p.349-350 | audience=general] ---
N76.5-6, N48.5
Genital ulcer syndrome is one of the commonest syndromes that affect
men and women. Single or multiple ulcers can be present.
Causes
Multiple organisms can cause genital sores, commonly:
~ Treponema pallidum bacteria: syphilis
~ Herpes simplex virus: genital herpes
~ Haemophilus ducreyi: Chancroid
~ Donovania granulomatis: Granuloma inguinale
~ Chlamydia strains: lymphogranuloma venerium (LGV)
Clinical features
Mixed infections are common
~ Primary syphilis: the ulcer is at first painless and may be
between or on the labia or on the penis
~ Secondary syphilis: multiple, painless ulcers on the penis
or vulva
~ Genital Herpes: small, multiple, usually painful blisters,
283
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
vesicles, or ulcers. Often recurrent
~ Granuloma inguinale: an irregular ulcer which increases in
size and may cover a large area
~ Chancroid: multiple, large, irregular ulcers with enlarged
painful suppurating lymph nodes
Differential diagnosis
~ Cancer of the penis in elderly men
~ Cancer of the vulva in women >50 years
Investigations
- Swab: for microscopy
- Blood: for VDRL/TPR
Patient complains of ulcers or sores
YES NO
If vesicle or blisters persist
Repeat Acyclovir for 7 days
If ulcers still persist
Refer for specialist’s management
If ulcers persist for >10 days
and partner was treated
If ulcers persist for >10 days
and partner was treated
Take history and examine.
Is there presence of history
of recurrent painful ulcers/
vesicles?
Acyclovir 400 mg 6hourly for 7
days and perform RPR test, if
positive, give Bezathine penicillin

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 3.2.7 Syphilis | p.356-358 | audience=general] ---
Complex chronic bacterial infection affecting a variety of organs and
with multiple manifestations.
Cause
~ Treponema pallidum
~ Transmitted sexually and from mother to foetus, rarely
through blood transfusion or non sexual contact
Clinical features
The disease has several stages
~ Primary syphilis: 10-90 days following inoculation, characterized by a painless genital ulcer with clean base and
indurated margins, regional lymphadenopathy. It can heal
spontaneously but the disease will progress to secondary
lesions
~ Secondary syphilis: few weeks to months (max 6 months)
from primary lesions, characterised by:
- Generalised maculopapular rash
- Mucous membranes lesions (patches and ulcers)
- Weeping papules (condyloma alata) in moist skin areas
- Generalized non tender lymphadenopathy
290
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
- Fever, meningitis, hepatitis, osteitis, arthritis, iritis
~ Early latent syphilis (<1 year in duration): clinically quiescent but possible relapse of secondary syphilis
~ Late latent syphilis: clinically quiescent, not very infectious
(but possible maternal foetal transmission)
~ Late (tertiary) syphilis: at any time after secondary syphilis
(even many years):
- nfiltrative tumour of skin, bones, liver
- Aortitis, aneurysms, aortic regurgitation
- Central nervous system disorders (neurosyphilis): meningo
vascular syphilis, hemiparesis, seizures, progressive
degeneration with paraesthesias, shooting pains, dementia,
psychosis
Investigations
- Non-treponemal antibody tests (VDRL and RPR)
- Positive 4-6 weeks after infection
- Used as screening test
- Possibility of false positive
- Remains positive 6-12 months after treatment
- Treponemal antibody tests (TPHA): very sensitive, used to confirm
a positive non-treponemal test. Remains positive for long even
after treatment so its positivity may not indicate active disease.
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Primary, seconday and early latent syphilis
- Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million IU IM stat, half in
each buttock
- or Doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours for 14 days
HC3
291
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Late latent or uncertain duration, or tertiary without
neurosyphilis
- Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million IU IM weekly for 3 weeks
- Or Doxycycline 100 mg every 12 hours for 28 days
HC3
Neurosyphilis
- Benzylpenicillin 4 million IU IV every 4 hours or
- Ceftriaxone 2 g IV or IM daily for 10-14 days
HC2
HC3
Followed by
- Benzathine penicillin 2.4 million IU IM weekly for 3 weeks
- Treat partner(s), abstain from sex during treatment and
10 days after
HC3

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 3.2.9.2 Congenital Syphilis | p.361-362 | audience=general] ---
It is a serious debilitating and disfiguring condition that can be fatal.
About one third of syphilis infected mothers have adverse pregnancy
outcome, one third give birth to a healthy baby, while the remaining
third may result into congenital syphilis infection.
Cause
~ Treponema pallidum bacteria
295
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
Clinical features
~ May be asymptomatic
~ Early congenital syphilis: begins to show after 6-8 weeks
of delivery
- Snuffle, palmar/plantar bullae, hepatosplenomegaly, pallor,
joint swelling with or without paralysis and cutaneous lesions.
These signs are non-specific.
~ Late congenital syphilis: begins to show at 2 years
- Microcephaly, depressed nasal bridge, arched palate,
perforated nasal septum, failure to thrive, mental sub
normality and musculoskeletal abnormalities
Investigations
Preferably perform the tests on mother:
- VDRL/RPR
- TPHA
Management of congenital syphilis
TREATMENT LOC
- Assume cerebrospinal involvement in all babies less
than 2 years
- Aqueous benzylpenicillin 150,000 IU/kg body weight
IV every 12 hours for a total of 10 days
- OR procaine penicillin, 50,000 IU/kg body weight, IM
single dose daily for 10 days
- Treat both parents for syphilis with benzathine penicillin
