# TOPIC: sti_trichomoniasis

--- [WHO AWaRe Antibiotic Book (2022) | 22. Sexually transmitted infections - trichomoniasis | p.287-293 | audience=general] ---
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book271
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
22. Sexually transmitted infections 
– trichomoniasis
Note
In general this chapter applies to adults and young people older than 12 years. In children, 
specialist advice should be sought where possible. Consideration should be given that an STI in 
a child may be due to child sexual abuse.
Key messages
• Trichomoniasis is the most common curable sexually transmitted infection (STI) and in 
women it can manifest as a vaginal discharge; men are usually asymptomatic.
• Asymptomatic people should also be treated because they can transmit the infection to 
others and all people with trichomoniasis should also be evaluated for other STIs.
• Preventive services should be offered (e.g. condoms, brief sexuality education, human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) pre-exposure prophylaxis to people at high risk of HIV 
infection) and sexual partners should be informed and treated
• Reporting of this infection to health authorities is encouraged according to local regulations.
Other relevant WHO resources (please check regularly for updates)
• Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) – fact sheets (189).
• WHO guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections (191).
• Laboratory diagnosis of sexually transmitted infections including human immunodeficiency 
virus (192).
• Global progress report on HIV, viral hepatitis and sexually transmitted infections, 2021 (193).
Definition
Trichomoniasis is an STI caused by the protozoan Trichomonas vaginalis.
272
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
22. Sexually transmitted infections – trichomoniasis
Trichomoniasis
Sexually transmitted infection
In general this guidance applies to adults and young people aged
over 12 years. In children, specialist advice should be sought where
possible. Consideration should be given that an STI in a child may
be due to child sexual abuse
A sexually transmitted infection (STI) caused by Trichomonas
vaginalis
De/g246nition
Trichomonas vaginalis is an anaerobe /g248agellated protozoan
Pathogen
Important elements of prevention include:
•Sexuality education
•Promoting consistent use of condoms
•Pre- and post-test counselling
•Safe sex and risk reduction counselling
•Interventions targeting high-risk groups
Prevention
Important:
•Sexual partners should be informed of the disease and
treated
•Reporting of this infection to health authorities is
encouraged according to local regulations
Diagnosis
Clinical Presentation
Microbiology Tests
Usually not needed
Other LaboratoryTests
Usually not needed
Imaging
•Most persons have mild symptoms or remain
asymptomatic (especially men) though they can still
transmit the infection
Symptomatic infection:
•: acuteonsetof vaginalin/g248ammationand dischargeIn women
(frothy and withabad smell),dysuriaand pelvicpain
•: urethral discharge, dysuria and testicularIn men
discomfort or pain; rarely epididymitis and prostatitis can
be present
•See WHO guidance “Laboratory diagnosis of sexually
transmitted infections”
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/85343
•: all patients with suspectedImportant
trichomoniasis should also be tested for other STIs
(e.g. HIV, syphilis, gonococcal infection)
Tests to consider:
•Wet mount microscopy (easy and inexpensive but should
be read within 10 minutes of sample collection)
•Nucleic acid ampli/g246cation tests for( very goodT. vaginalis
sensitivity; preferred if available)
•Culture (good sensitivity but requires long incubation)
•Samples that can be used: Urethral, endocervical, and
vaginal swabs
Treatment
Clinical Considerations
Since treatment duration varies, please refer to the
corresponding antibiotic section for treatment duration
•Evidence supports better cure rates with 7-day course
(consider if treatment adherence is not an issue)
Antibiotic Treatment Duration
Treatmenti s aligned with the WHO 2021 guidelines
for the managemento f symptomatic sexually
transmitted infections
(https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/342523)
Treatment is always indicated when infection is diagnosed,
including in asymptomatic persons because they can
transmit the infection to others
All dosages are for normal renal function
Antibiotic Treatment
Metronidazole 2 g ORAL
Treatment duration: single dose
----------------------------------- -----------------------------------OR
Metronidazole 400 or 500 mg q12h ORAL
Treatment duration: 7 days
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book273
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
22. Sexually transmitted infections – trichomoniasis
Pathogen
Trichomoniasis is caused by Trichomonas vaginalis, an anaerobe flagellated protozoan. 
Pathophysiology
Trichomonas vaginalis infects the mucosa of the urogenital tract during sexual contact and 
produces a local inflammatory response that causes vaginal or urethral discharge.
Epidemiology
Trichomoniasis is the most prevalent STI worldwide with an estimated 156 million new 
cases in 2020 as reported by WHO (193). 
The infection most commonly affects women older than 40 years. As with other STIs, the 
risk of acquiring or transmitting HIV is higher in cases of trichomoniasis and the infection 
is associated with adverse outcomes in pregnancy, such as preterm delivery, premature 
rupture of membranes and low birth weight (220). If left untreated, trichomoniasis can 
persist for months or years and in pregnant women, it can be transmitted to the baby during 
delivery. Common risk factors for infection include multiple sex partners, a history of having 
other STIs (e.g. HIV infection) and substance abuse.
Clinical presentation
Most cases of trichomoniasis are asymptomatic, especially in men, or have mild symptoms. 
In women, symptoms include acute onset of vaginal inflammation and discharge (usually 
characterized by a bad smell and with a frothy appearance), dysuria and pelvic pain. In 
men, symptomatic infection usually presents with urethral discharge, dysuria, and testicular 
discomfort or pain. Epididymitis and prostatitis can also occur in a minority of cases.
Laboratory tests 
For more comprehensive information on the diagnosis of trichomoniasis, please refer to the 
most recent (2013) WHO guideline on the laboratory diagnosis of STIs (192). Please check 
the WHO website regularly for possible updates.
Patient microbiology tests
All people with trichomoniasis are also usually evaluated for other STIs, such as chlamydial 
infection, gonococcal infection, hepatitis B and hepatitis C, HIV infection and syphilis.
274The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
22. Sexually transmitted infections – trichomoniasis
Tests to consider when trichomoniasis is suspected are indicated in Table 22.1.
Molecular assays such as nucleic acid amplification tests have the highest sensitivity 
of all diagnostic methods to detect Trichomonas vaginalis but they are not currently widely 
available as rapid point-of-care tests. However, if available, they should be used. Vaginal 
swabs are the samples of choice, but endocervical samples and urine can be used for some 
assays. 
Historically, trichomoniasis has been diagnosed by performing wet mount 
microscopy. Although this is not the gold standard technique, a wet mount is frequently 
used because it is quick, inexpensive and easy to perform. However, to have a good chance 
of successfully identifying the motile trichomonads, the slide should be read within 10 
minutes of collection of the sample since trichomonads quickly lose their motility. Nonmotile cells cannot be diagnosed as trichomonads due to possible misidentification; for 
example, a non-motile trichomonad is difficult to differentiate from the nucleus of a vaginal 
epithelial cell.
Culture of Trichomonas vaginalis, which has a higher sensitivity than the wet mount 
microscopic examination, was the cornerstone for detecting this organism before the 
advent of point-of-care antigen tests and nucleic acid amplification tests. Although a culture 
medium is commercially available, cultures of samples from women with trichomoniasis are 
usually positive in the first 3 days of inoculation, but they have to be incubated for up to 7 
days to rule out infection. Routine culture methods detecting Trichomonas vaginalis are no 
longer widely performed.
Additional tests for other STIs that could be considered when trichomoniasis is 
confirmed or suspected are shown in Table 22.2.
Table 22.1 – Microbiology tests to consider when trichomoniasis is suspected as 
indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Microscopya,b To assess microbial morphology 
and presence or absence of 
white blood cells
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
Cultureb Initial step to detect and identify 
bacterial species for selection of 
appropriate antibiotic regimens
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics.
a If available, nucleic acid amplification tests for Trichomonas vaginalis could be considered, especially if the 
microscopy examination is negative. Nucleic acid tests for trichomoniasis are not listed in the third version of the EDL.
b Possible specimens are urethral swabs, endocervical swabs and vaginal swabs.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book275
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
22. Sexually transmitted infections – trichomoniasis
Table 22.2 – Additional tests for other sexually transmitted infections to consider in 
patients with confirmed or suspected trichomoniasis as indicated in the WHO EDL (6)
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Chlamydial 
urogenital 
infection and 
gonococcal 
infection
Qualitative test 
for Chlamydia 
trachomatis and 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae 
infections (NAAT)
To diagnose 
chlamydial and/
or gonorrhoeal 
urogenital disease and 
extragenital infection
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
HIV Anti-HIV-1 and -HIV-2 
antibody (RDT)
Self-testing to screen 
for HIV
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa
HIV Anti-HIV-1 and -HIV-2 
antibody (RDT and 
immunoassay)
To screen for HIV 
infection
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
HIV Combined anti-
HIV-1/HIV-2 antibody 
and p24 antigen (RDT 
and immunoassay)
To screen for HIV 
infection
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Hepatitis B Hepatitis B virus 
surface antigen (RDT, 
immunoassay)
To screen for acute 
and chronic hepatitis 
B virus infection in 
people > 12 months
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Hepatitis B IgM-specific 
antibodies 
to hepatitis B 
core antigen 
(immunoassay)
To aid in the diagnosis 
of acute HBV infection 
in the context of 
outbreak investigation
Health care facilities with 
clinical laboratories
continues
276The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book
 PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
22. Sexually transmitted infections – trichomoniasis
Table 22.2 continued
Infection Diagnostic test Purpose of the test Settings where the test 
should be available
Hepatitis C Anti-hepatitis C 
antibody (RDT, 
immunoassay)
To screen for hepatitis 
C virus infection in 
people > 18 months
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa (RDT)
Health care facilities 
with clinical laboratories 
(immunoassay)
Syphilis Antibodies to 
Treponema pallidumb 
(RDT)
To diagnose or help to 
diagnose Treponema 
pallidum
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa
Syphilis and 
HIV combined 
test
Combined antibodies 
to Treponema pallidum 
and HIV-1/HIV-2 (RDT)
To diagnose or help to 
diagnose HIV and/or 
Treponema pallidum
Community settings and 
health facilities without 
laboratoriesa
EDL: Model List of Essential In Vitro Diagnostics; HIV: human immunodeficiency virus; NAAT: nucleic acid 
amplification test; RDT: rapid diagnostic test.
a Community and health settings without laboratories are facilities such as health posts and centres, doctors’ offices, 
outreach clinics, ambulatory care and home-based and self-testing. These tests are also assumed to be available at 
health care facilities with laboratories.
b Usually a non-treponemal test, such as rapid plasma reagin, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory test, is used for 
screening. Please refer to the chapter on syphilis for more details on testing.
Other tests
When trichomoniasis is suspected, laboratory tests (other than microbiology) are not usually 
needed.
Using microbiology surveillance data
Routine surveillance is not helpful to inform empiric guidance. 
Imaging
When trichomoniasis is suspected, imaging is not usually needed.
Antibiotic treatment
Antibiotic treatment is always indicated when trichomoniasis is diagnosed (Table 22.3), 
including in asymptomatic patients, to stop transmission. Sexual partners should also be 
tested and treated if infected.
The WHO AWaRe (Access, Watch, Reserve) antibiotic book277
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE 
22. Sexually transmitted infections – trichomoniasis
Table 22.3 – Antibiotic treatment for trichomoniasis as indicated in the 2021 WHO 
guidelines for the management of symptomatic sexually transmitted infections (191)
Please check the WHO website regularly for possible updates
Treatment Total treatment duration
 Metronidazole (oral): 2 g
OR
 Metronidazole (oral): 400 or 500 mg given 
every 12 hoursa
Single dose 
7 days
Note. All dosages are for normal renal and hepatic function.
a If compliance is not a problem, consider giving 500 mg (oral) every 12 hours for 7 days. Evidence supports better 
cure rates with a 7-day course of treatment compared with a single dose (221). 
Legend: ACCESS antibiotics are indicated in green, WATCH antibiotics in orange and RESERVE antibiotics in red.
Prevention
No effective vaccine against Trichomonas vaginalis is available. Prevention of infection 
is therefore a key strategy. Important elements of prevention include counselling and 
behavioural approaches including comprehensive sexuality education, pre- and posttest counselling, safe sex and risk reduction counselling, and promoting consistent use 
of condoms. Interventions targeting high-risk groups (e.g. men who have sex with men, 
transgender people, sex workers and people who inject drugs) may be considered. Offering 
HIV pre-exposure prophylaxis to people at high risk of HIV infection may be considered.
Sexual partners should always be informed of the infection and treated (189). 
Reporting of this infection to health authorities according to local regulations should also 
be done.

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 3.2.2 Abnormal Vaginal Discharge Syndrome | p.345-349 | audience=general] ---
ICD10 CODE: N76
Often the first evidence of genital infection al, though absence of abnormal vaginal discharge does not mean absence
of infection. Normal discharge is small in quantity and white to colourless.
Not all vaginal infections are sexually transmitted diseases.
Causes
~ Can be a variety and often mixture of organisms
~ Vaginitis: by Candida albicanis, Trichomonas vaginalis or
bacterial vaginosis (by Gardnerella vaginalis, Mycoplasma
hominis)
~ Cervicitis: commonly due to gonorrhoea and chlamydia:
usually asymptomatic and rarely a cause of abnormal vaginal discharge.
~ Clinical features
~ Increased quantity of discharge, abnormal colour and odour
~ Lower abdominal pain, itching and pain at sexual intercourse may be present
~ In Candida albicans vaginitis: very itchy thick or lumpy
white discharge, red inflamed vulva
~ Trichomonas vaginalis: itchy greenish-yellow frothy discharge with offensive smell
~ Bacterial vaginosis: thin discharge with a fishy smell from
the vagina
279
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
Candida vaginitis and bacterial vaginosis are NOT sexually transmitted
diseases, even though sexual activity is a risk factor.
~ Gonorrhoea causes cervicitis and rarely vaginitis. Thereis a
purulent thin mucoid slightly yellow pus discharge with no
smell and non-itchy
~ Chlamydia causes cervicitis which may present with a nonitchy, thin, colourless discharge
Differential diagnosis
~ Cancer of the cervix (blood-stained smelly discharge)
~ Intra-vaginal use of detergents, chemicals, physical agents
and herbs, chronic tampon use, allergic vaginitis
Investigations
- Speculum examination
- Pus swab: microscopy, Gram stain, C&S
- PH, KOH
- Blood: syphilis tests (RPR/VDRL)
- HIV Testing
280
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
NO
NO
YES
YES
Take history and examine
for gen tal ulcers and
abdominal tenderness.
Perform speculum examin
tion for cervical lesions.If there are ulcers,
treat as genital
ulcers
On speculum examin
tion, are signs of
cancer of the cervix
Refer to Gynaecologist immediately
Check for erythema
excoriations or thrush
Fluconazole 150 mg-200mg plus
Metronidazole tablets, 2 g single
dose.
If pregnant replace Fluconazole
with Clotrimazole pessary 100 mg
once for 6 days and add Metronidazole only after 1st trimester
Cexfixime 400 mg stat plus
Doxycycline 100 mg 12 hourly
for 7 days plus Metronidazole
2 g single dose. Treat sexual
partners. If pregnant replace
Doxycycline with Erythromycin
500 mg 6 hourly for 7 days
If discharge persists
beyond 7 days
If discharge persists beyond
7 days and partners were
treated, refer for specialist’s
management
Give cefixime 400 mg stat plus
doxycycline 100 mg 12 hourly for 7
days and if pregnant give Erythromycin 500 mg 6 hourly for 7 days
and treat sexual partners.
If discharge persists beyond 7
days and partners were treated,
refer for specialist’s management
If there is abdominal
tenderness, treat as
lower abdominal
281
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- Take history and examine for genital ulcers, abdominal
tenderness
- Perform speculum examination for cervical lesions
- Assess risk for sexually transmitted disease
If there is lower abdominal tenderness and sexually active:
- Treat as in PID (see section 14.1.2)
If no lower abdominal pain and discharge is thick and lumpy, vagina
is itchy and erythema or excoriations are present: likely Candida
- Give clotrimazole pessaries 100 mg; insert high in
vagina once daily before bedtime for 6 days or twice
daily for 3 days
- Or fluconazole 200 mg tablets single dose, orally
- ± Metronidazole 2 g stat dose
HC2
If abundant/smelly discharge/vaginosis: possible trichomonas
or vaginosis
- Metronidazole 2 g stat
HC2
If purulent discharge, or high risk of STD, or previous treatment
non effective: treat for gonorrhea, and chlamydia, and trichomonas
- Give cefixime 400 mg stat or ceftriaxone 1g
IV stat
- Plus doxycycline 100 mg 12 hourly for 7 days
Plus metronidazole 2 g stat
HC3
282
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 3: HIV/AIDS and Sexually Transmitted Infections
TREATMENT LOC
However if client is pregnant
- Replace doxycycline with erythromycin 500 mg 6
hourly for 7 days or
- Azithromycin 1 g stat
- Treat the partner
If discharge or dysuria still persists and partners treated:
- Refer for further management
HC3
