# TOPIC: viral_infections_no_antibiotic

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.1 Avian Influenza | p.196-199 | audience=general] ---
Influenza caused by avian (bird) influenza Type A viruses (mainly H5N1
strain). It is endemic in the poultry population in Eurasia and can occasionally be transmitted to humans through direct contact with sick
birds (inhalation of infectious droplets). Disease can be mild or severe
and has limited potential to spread from person to person but there is
risk of mutations giving rise to a very infectious virus which could cause
widespread epidemics. Avian flu is a notifiable disease.
Cause
~ Avian (bird) influenza Type A viruses
Clinical features
~ Conjuctivitis
130
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
~ Flu symptoms: fever, cough, sore throat, muscle aches
~ Gastrointestinal (diarrhoea) and neurological symptoms
~ In some cases, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS)
Investigations
- Blood and respiratory specimens, nose swab: lab test for influenza
and rule out bacterial infection
- Testing must be in a special laboratory
Management
TREATMENT LOC
If patient requires hospitalisation
- Hospitalise patient under appropriate infection control
precautions
- Administer oxygen as required. Avoid nebulisers and high
air flow oxygen masks
RR
- Give paracetamol or ibuprofen for fever prn
- Give oseltamivir phosphate in patients ≥ 1 year who have
been symptomatic for no more than two days. Treat for 5
days as below:
Adults and children ≥ 13 years: 75 mg twice daily
Child > 1 year and < 15 kg: 30 mg twice daily
Child 15– 23 kg: 45 mg twice daily
Child 23–40 kg body weight:60 mg twice daily
Child > 40 kg body weight: 75 mg twice daily If a case does
not require hospitalisation f Educate the patient and his/her
family on:
Personal hygiene and infection control measures
Hand-washing, use of a paper or surgical mask by the ill person
Restriction of social contacts
Seek prompt medical care if the condition worsens
Prophylactic use of oseltamivir
RR
131
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
- Indicated in persons 13 years and above who have come
into contact with affected birds/patients
- Close contact: 75 mg once daily for at least 7 days
- Community contacts: 75 mg once daily up to 6 weeks
- Protection lasts only during the period of chemoprophylaxis
RR
Discharge policy
~ Infection control precautions for adult patients should remain in place for 7 days after resolution of fever and for 21
days in children younger than 12 years
~ Children should not attend school during this period
Control and Prevention of Nosocomial Spread of Influenza A (H5N1)
Health workers should observe the following to prevent the spread of
avian influenza in the health care facilities:
~ Observe droplet and contact precautions. In addition, get
negative pressure room if available
~ Isolate the patient to a single room
~ Place beds more than 1 metre apart and preferably separated by a physical barrier (e.g., curtain, partition)
~ Appropriate personal protective equipment (APPE) in all
those entering patients’ rooms. APPE includes high efficiency mask, gown, face shield or goggles, and gloves
~ Limit the number of health care workers (HCWs) and other
hospital employees who have direct contact with the patient(s). These HCWs should:
~ Be properly trained in infection control precautions
~ Monitor their own temperature twice daily and report any
febrile event to hospital authorities
~ A HCW who has a fever (>380C) and who has had direct
patient contact should be treated immediately
132
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
~ Restrict the number of visitors, provide them with APPE,
and instruct them in its use

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.2 Chicken pox | p.199-200 | audience=general] ---
A highly contagious viral infection. Patients are contagious from 2 days
before onset of the rash until all lesions have crusted. An attack of
chicken pox usually confers lifelong immunity. Disease is more severe
and complicated in adults.
Causes
~ Varicella Zoster virus (VZV) by droplet infection
Clinical features
~ Incubation period is 14 days, but shorter in immuno- compromised host
~ Mild fevers occur 10-20 days after exposure
~ Prodromal symptoms consisting of low fever, headache,
and malaise occurring 2 to 3 days before the eruption
~ Eruptive phase: they appear as macules, papules, vesicles,
pustules and crusts. The most characteristic lesion is a vesicle looking like a drop of water on the skin. Vesicles rupture
easily and may become infected
~ The rash begins on the trunk and spreads to the face and
extremities
~ Lesions of different stages (crops) exist together at the same
time in any given body area
~ Complications may include septicaemia, pneumonia, fulminating haemorrhagic varicella, and meningoencephalitis
Differential diagnosis
~ Drug-induced eruption
~ Scabies
~ Insect bites
~ Erythema multiforme, impetigo
~ Other viral infections with fever and skin rash
133
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
Investigations
¾ Virus isolation possible but not necessary
¾ Diagnosis is practically clinical
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Symptomatic and supportive treatment
- Apply calamine lotion every 12 hours f Cool, wet
compresses to provide relief
Chlorpheniramine: Adult 4 mg every 12 hours Child <5
years: 1-2 mg every 12 hours for 3 days
Pain relief: paracetamol 10 mg/kg every 6 hours
In adults and children >12 years consider antivirals: Oral
aciclovir 800 mg every 6 hours for 7 days Keep child at
home/remove from school till healed to avoid spread
HC2
HC4
Prevention
~ Isolation of infected patient
~ Avoid contact between infected persons and immuno- suppressed persons

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.3 Measles | p.200-202 | audience=general] ---
An acute, highly communicable viral infection characterized by a generalised skin rash, fever, and inflammation of mucous membranes. Measles
is a notifiable disease.
Cause
~ Measles virus spreads by droplet infection and direct
contact
134
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
Clinical features
~ Catarrhal stage: high fever, Koplik’s spots (diagnostic) runny nose, barking cough, conjunctivitis
~ Misery, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea
~ Later: generalised maculopapular skin rash followed by desquamation after few days
Complications
~ Secondary bacterial respiratory tract infection, e.g. bronchopneumonia, otitis media
~ Severe acute malnutrition especially following diarrhoea
~ Cancrum oris (from mouth sepsis)
~ Corneal ulceration and panophthalmitis – can lead to blindness
~ Demyelinating encephalitis
~ Thrombocytopaenic purpura
Differential diagnosis
~ German measles (Rubella)
~ Other viral diseases causing skin rash
Investigations
- Clinical diagnosis is sufficient though virus isolation is possible
Management (symptomatic)
TREATMENT LOC
- Isolate patients (at home or health centre)
- Paracetamol prn for fever
Apply tetracycline eye ointment 1% every 12 hours
for 5 days
- Increase fluid and nutritional intake (high risk of malnutrition and dehydration
HC2
135
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
- Give 3 doses of vitamin A: first dose at diagnosis, 2nd
dose the next day and 3rd dose on day 14 Child <6
months: 50,000 IU
Child 6-12 months: 100,000 IU
Child >12 months: 200,000 IU
- Monitor for and treat secondary bacterial infections
with appropriate antibiotics immediately
- Refer to hospital in case of complications
Prevention
~ Measles vaccination (see chapter 18)
~ Avoid contact between infected and uninfected persons
~ Educate the public against the common local myths e.g.
stopping to feed meat and fish to measles patients

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.4 Poliomyelitis | p.202-204 | audience=general] ---
An acute viral infection characterised by acute onset of flaccid paralysis
of skeletal muscles. It is transmitted from person to person through the
faecal-oral route. Poliomyelitis is a notifiable disease.
Cause
~ Polio virus (enterovirus) types I, II, and III
Clinical features
~ Majority of cases are asymptomatic, only 1% result in flaccid paralysis
~ Non-paralytic form: minor illness of fever, malaise, headache, and vomiting, muscle pains, spontaneous recovery
in 10 days
~ Paralytic form: after the aspecific symptoms, rapid onset
(from morning to evening) of asymmetric flaccid paralysis,
136
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
predominantly of the lower limbs, with ascending progression
~ Paralysis of respiratory muscles is life threatening (bulbar
polio)
~ Aseptic meningitis may occur as a complication
Differential diagnosis
~ Guillain-Barré syndrome
~ Traumatic neuritis
~ Transverse myelitis
~ Pesticides and food poisoning
Consider all cass of Acute Flaccid Paralysis as possible Poliomyelitis: alert
the district focal person for epidemic control, and send 2 stool samples
(refrigerated).
Investigations
- Isolation of the virus from stool samples
- Viral culture
- Ensure that Giardia intestinalis, Entamoeba histolytica, Cryptosporidium, Cyclospora, sarcocystis, Toxoplasma gondii are
included in the investigations
Management
TREATMENT LOC
Acute stage
Poliomyelitis in this stage without paralysis is difficult to
diagnose
Paralytic form
- If paralysis is recent, rest the patient completely Note:
Do not give IM injections as they make the paralysis
worse
H
137
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
- Refer the patient to a hospital for supportive care
- After recovery (if partially/not immunised), complete
recommended immunisation schedule
Chronic stage
- Encourage active use of the limb to restore muscle
function/physiotherapy
- In event of severe contractures, refer for corrective
surgery
H
Prevention
~ Isolate patient for nursing and treatment, applying contact
and droplets precautions
~ Immunise all children below 5 years from the area of the
suspected case
~ If case is confirmed, organize mass immunisation campaign
~ Proper disposal of children’s faeces
~ Immunisation (see chapter 18)
~ Proper hygiene and sanitation

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.5 Rabies | p.204-205 | audience=general] ---
Rabies is a viral infection of wild and domestic animals, transmitted to
humans by saliva of infected animals through bites, scratches or licks
on broken skin or mucuos membranes. Once symptoms develop, rabies
presents as a fatal encephalitis: there is no cure and treatment is palliative.
Before symptomatic disease has developed, rabies can effectively be
prevented by post-exposure prophylaxis.
Cause
~ Rabies virus. Incubation is average 20-90 days but can be
138
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
shorter in severe exposure (multiple bites, bites on face/
neck) of even longer (> a year) in a few cases
Clinical features
~ Itching or paraesthesiae (abnormal sensation) around site
of exposure, malaise, fever
~ Neurologic phase
~ Furious form: psychomotor agitation or hydrophobia (throat
spasm and panic, triggered by attempt to drink or sight/
sound/touch of water) and aerophobia (similar response to
a draft of air)
~ Paralytic form (rarer): progressive ascending paralysis
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- There is no cure. In case of suspected exposure, take
all the appropriate steps to prevent the infection (see
section1.2.1.3 on animal bites)
- Start as soon as the exposure happens or as soon as
the patient comes for medical attention, regardless of
whatever time has passed from the exposure
H
- Admit case
- Palliative and supportive care
- Observe strict hygienic precautions
Avoid contact with patient’s body fluids or secretions
PPE (personal protective equipment)
Caution: the patient may bite
- Counsel caregivers on rabies and consequences
H
139
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.6.1 Ebola and Marburg | p.206-209 | audience=general] ---
Ebola and Marburg are severe zoonotic multisystem febrile diseases
caused by RNA viruses. They are notifiable diseases.
Cause
~ Ebola and Marburg viruses. Transmission to humans happens through contact with meat or body fluids of an infected animal. The disease can then be transmitted from
human to human through body fluids (including semen for
months after recovery) and it is highly contagious.
Risk factors
~ Communities around game parks
~ Communities in endemic area
~ Cultural practices like burial rituals
~ Poor infection control practices
~ History of exposure to infected people in the last 2 to 21
days i.e sexual partner, breastfeeding mothers
~ Recent contact with infected animals e.g. monkeys, bats,
infected game meat
~ Clinical features
~ Early signs (non specific): sudden fever, weakness, headache,
muscle pains, loss of appetite, conjunctivitis
~ Late signs:
~ Diarrhoea (watery or bloody), vomiting
~ Mucosal and gastrointestinal bleeding: chest pain, respiratory
distress, circulatory shock
~ CNS dysfunction, confusion, seizures
140
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
~ Miscarriage in pregnancy
~ Elevated AST and ALT, kidney injury, electrolyte abnormalities
Note: Haemorrhage is seen in less than a third of Ebola patients
Differential diagnosis
~ Malaria, rickettsiosis, meningitis
~ Shigellosis, typhoid
~ Anthrax, sepsis, viral hepatitis, dengue, leptospirosis
Investigations
~ Send blood sample to a referral laboratory for specific testing (taking off blood samples from patients suspected of viral
hemorrhagic fever should be done by a trained healthcare
worker in appropriate PPE.
~ Notify district surveillance focal person
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- Refer all patients to regional referral hospital for management in an appropriate setting
- Notify the district health team
RR
Safety of health workers: maximum level of infection control
procedures
Health workers should maintain a high level of suspicion for Ebola
virus disease. While standard precautions should be followed for all
patients at all times, implementation of transmission-based precautions for cases suspected or confirmed to have Ebola or Marburg virus
diseases is essential. This includes: screening for rapid identification
and isolation of cases,
141
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
- Hand hygiene according to the WHO 5 moments safe injection
practices use of personal protective equipment (e.g. eye protection, mask (medical or respirator), gloves, gown or coverall, head
covering, apron and gum (rubber) boots.
- Handling and disposing of all waste related to the care of an Ebola
patients as infectious
- Safe handling and disinfection of linens (or disposal if not possible)
and thorough cleaning and disinfection of the environment and
medical equipment.
- Disinfectants (e.g. chlorine mixture of 0.5% for surfaces) used
must be prepared and used ensuring adequate concentration and
contact time on surfaces.
- Handling of the deceased is particularly high risk and should be
kept to a minimum. Strict adherence to IPC measures including
hand hygiene, use of personal protective equipment (e.g. eye
protection, mask (medical or respirator), gloves, gown or coverall,
head covering, apron and gum (rubber) boots is required.
Patient care
Refer to the MoH recent guidelines for management of viral hemorrrhagic fevers
- Optimised Supportive treatment of signs and symptoms
- Replace and monitor fluids and electrolytes for patients with
diarrhoea or vomiting
Triage and contact tracing
- Triage patient (those who had contact with a patient or not)
- Contact identification, contact listing and contact follow up
Dead Body handling
- Avoid washing or touching the dead f There should be no gathering
at funerals. The dead should be buried promptly by a designated
burial team
Prevention
~ Health education of the population (e.g. avoid eating w i l d animals)
142
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
~ Effective outbreak communication and h a v i n g haemorrhagic
viral fever protocols in place
~ Appropriate safety gear for patients/health workers i n suspect
cases
~ Modification of burial practices
~ Use of condoms

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.6.2 Yellow Fever | p.209-210 | audience=general] ---
An acute viral haemorrhagic fever transmitted through the bite of infected
female Aedes aegypti mosquito. Incubation period is 3 to 6 days. It is
a notifiable disease.
cause
~ Yellow fever RNA virus
Risk factors
~ Residents in endemic area
~ Hunters and settlers around game parks
Clinical features
First stage:
~ Fever, chills, headache, backache, muscle pain, prostration,
nausea, vomiting, fatigue. Usually resolves within 3-4 days.
Second stage:
~ About 15% of cases enter into a second or toxic stage after 1-2 day of remission: high fever, prostration, signs and
symptoms of hepatic failure, renal failure and bleeding (
jaundice, nose bleeding, gingival bleeding, vomiting blood,
blood in stool)
~ About half of these patients die within 7-10 days
Differential diagnosis
~ Hepatitis E, liver failure
~ Malaria, Ebola
143
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
investigations
~ PCR in early phases
~ ELISA in the late stageIt is a notifiable disease.
Management
TREATMENT LOC
- Refer all cases to regional referral hospital
- Notify the district health team
- There is no specific antiviral drug treatment
- Supportive treatment is recommended:
- Rehydration
- Management of liver and kidney failure
- Antipyretics for fever
- Blood transfusion
- Treat associated bacterial infections with antibiotics
RR
Note
- Individuals who have recovered from a yellow fever infection
develop life-long immunity
Prevention
~ Vaccination (see chapter 18)
~ Elimination of mosquito breeding sites
~ Epidemic preparedness i.e prompt detection and treatment

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 2.3.7 COVID-19 Disease | p.210-216 | audience=general] ---
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) results from infection with the Severe
Acute Respiratory Syndrome Coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It is a novel
virus in humans, knowledge of which and its pathogenesis still evolving.
Additionally, the population-level immunity is uncertain. Complications
of the severe infection can result in death.
144
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
Clinical features
Early symptoms are non-specific and may include:
- fever, cough, myalgia, fatigue, shortness of breath, sore throat,
headache, flu-like symptoms, diarrhea, nausea, respiratory
distress, features of renal failure, pericarditis, and Disseminated
Intravascular Coagulation (DIC).
It is important to know that many individuals with COVID-19 are asymptomatic. It is therefore paramount that all health workers observe strict
infection prevention and control (IPC) measures at all times.
Classification of COVID 19 disease
Disease Stage Hallmark Features
Mild Disease No Respiratory Distress
Normal Vital Signs
Moderate
Disease
Non-Severe
Pneumonia
Crackles in chest but Normal
SPO2,
mild respiratory distress (Resp
Rate <30)
Severe
Disease
Oxygen
De saturation
Severe Respiratory distress
(Resp Rate >30) & SPO2 <90%,
Critical Organ Dysfunction
• CNS: Altered Mental State
• CVS: Hypotension & Shock
• Kidney: Decreased Urine
Output, Raised Creatinine
• Liver: Elevated liver enzymes
• Coagulation: Raised PT &
INR, Thrombocytopenia
• Endocrine: Hypoglycemia
Groups at High Risk of Developing Severe Disease or Complications
- Age > 65 year
- Obesity
- Lung diseases (e.g. asthma, TB, COPD)
- Hypertension
145
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
Patient enters health facility grounds
Low risk for
COVID-19:
Direct to facility for further
management
Stabilize
(Oxygen if available) in a designated isolation area
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
to
All
Yes to at least 1
Provide a medical mask to the
patient and direct to designated
triage area
ADMIT FOR ISOLATION
Admit for isolation to hospital, another designated
facility (if available), or
home (case-by-case basis:
must have ability for close
follow up)
ADMIT FOR ISOLATION
Prioritize for admission to
isolation ward with critical
care capability
Danger signs
High risk for development of
serious illness or complications
Collect samples for:
• COVID-19
• Malaria RDT (if fever)
Danger signs
+ Rapid breathing:
>30 per min (adult/child>5y)
>40 per min (child 1-5y)
>50 per min (child<1y)
+ Difficult breathing and/or
chest indrawing
+ Persistent high fever for 3 or
more days
+ Disorientation, seizures or
convulsions
+ Lethargy (excessive weakness,
tiredness)
+ Sunken eyes or other signs of
severe dehydration
+ Inability to drink or eat
Wash or sanitize hands
Take temperature (if infrared or
axillary thermometer available)
SUSPECT CASE
1. Is the temperature T>37.5OC?
2. Have had a fever?
3. Do you have symptoms such as cough,
shortness of breath, muscle aches, weakness,
sore throat, or headache?
146
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
- Heart conditions such as history of heart attack or stroke
- Diabetes
- Cancer patients whether or not on chemotherapy
- Advanced liver disease
- Person living with HIV
- Kidney disease
- Severe Acute Malnutrition
- Sickle cell disease
- COVID 19 unvaccinated
- Pregnancy and recent pregnancy
- Hypertension
Differential diagnoses
- Malaria and other febrile illnesses.
- common respiratory, infectious, cardiovascular, oncological,
and gastrointestinal diseases.
Investigations
147
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
Management
- Perform SARS-CoV-2 Rapid Diagnostic Test (RDT)
- Carry out nasopharyngeal swabs for RT-RNA test
COVID-19 screening and triage process at health facilities
~ COVID-19 triage aims to flag suspected patients at first
point of contact within the healthcare system in order to
~ protect other patients and staff from potential exposure.
~ identify and rapidly address severe symptoms, rule out other conditions with features similar to COVID-19, ascertain
if suspect case definition is met
~ All suspected patients should be directed to a designated
area away from other patients and handled as per standard
covid protection guidelines
~ Refer to the Comprehensive COVID-19 Case Management
Guidelines for details.
TREATMENT LOC
Safety of health workers and caregivers: maximum
level of infection control procedures
HC2
Strict isolation of suspect cases
Use of adequate protective gear
Minimize invasive intervention
Safe handling of linen
Appropriate use of chlorine mixtures
Proper disposal of health care waste
Educate the patient and care givers on appropriate infection
control measures
No Hospitalization (mild to moderate diseases) HC2
148
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
All patients with no risk of developing severe COVID-19
diseases.
- symptom management, supportive care, and monitoring
(at home, or in the community).
- Control fevers with paracetamol, multivitamins and
advise on balanced diet
Adults and Children >40kg at increased risk of developing severe COVID-19 diseases. Refer to current
Covid-19 treatment guidelines.
- nimatrelvir/ritonavir 300/100mg orally (PO) twice
daily for 5 days (must be initiated within 5 days of
symptom onset)
- OR remdesivir IV infusion Once daily for 3 days with a
loading dose 200mg on Day 1 and 100mg on subsequent days. (initiated within 7 days of symptom onset)
- OR molnupiravir 800mg orally (PO) twice daily for 5
days ONLY when ritonavir-boosted nirmatrelvir or
remdesivir cannot be used; treatment should be initiated
as soon as possible and within 5 days of symptom
onset (contraindicated in pregnant or breastfeeding
women and children)
If the patient requires hospitalization (Severe to Critical
disease)
RR
~ Oxygen therapy
~ And Corticosteroids
~ And Venous thromboembolism prophylaxis
~ And Interleukin-6 receptor blocker (tocilizumab
or sarilumab)
or JAK Inhibitor (baricitinib)
For details refer to the Comprehensive COVID-19 case
Management Guidelines
149
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 2: Infectious Diseases
Prevention
~ Vaccination (Refer to chapter 18: Immunization)
~ Epidemic preparedness i.e. prompt detection and treatment
~ Infection Prevention and control measures including Mask
wearing, social distancing, regular handwashing, avoid
shaking hands etc.

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 5.2.3 Coryza (Common Cold) | p.413-415 | audience=general] ---
Acute inflammation of the upper respiratory tract; rhinitis (nasal mucosa)
and rhinopharyngitis (nasal and pharyngitis).
Cause
~ Viruses - several types, often rhinoviruses
347
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
Clinical features
~ Onset usually sudden
~ Tickling sensation in nose and sneezing
~ Throat dry and sore
~ Profuse nasal watery or purulent discharge, tearing
Complications
~ Sinusitis
~ Lower respiratory tract infection (pneumonia)
~ Ear ache, deafness, otitis media
~ Headache
Differential diagnosis
~ Nasal allergy
Managemen
Common cold is a viral disease and so does NOT require any antibiotics. Antibiotics do not promote recovery or prevent complications
and cause patients unnecessary side effects
TREATMENT LOC
No antibiotics, give only symptomatic treatment
- Increase fluid intake, preferably warm drinks f Give
paracetamol for 2-3 days
- Home remedies (steam, honey)
- Xylometazoline 0.05 - 0.1% nasal drops 2-3 drops into
each nostril 3 times daily (max: 5 days)
For breastfeeding children
- Continue breastfeeding
- Clear the nose with normal saline to ease breathing
or feeding
- Keep the child warm
HC2
HC4
348
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
TREATMENT LOC
Note
- Avoid cough syrups in children below 6 years
Prevention
~ Avoid contact with infected persons
~ Include adequate fresh fruits and vegetables in the diet

--- [Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023 (4th ed.) | 5.2.5 Influenza (” Flu”) | p.416-417 | audience=general] ---
A specific acute respiratory tract illness occurring in epidemics and occasionally pandemics. Influenza virus strains can be transmitted to humans
from animals (pigs, birds) and can occasionally mutate and spread from
person to person (e.g., swine flu, or H1N1).
Cause
~ Influenza viruses of several types and strains
~ Spread by droplet inhalation
Clinical features
~ Sudden onset
~ Headache, pain in back and limbs
~ Anorexia, sometimes nausea and vomiting
~ Fever for 2-3 days with shivering
~ Inflamed throat
~ Harsh unproductive cough
350
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
Complications
~ Secondary bacterial infection: bronchopneumonia
~ Toxic cardiomyopathy and sudden death
Differential diagnosis
~ Other respiratory viral infections
Investigations
- Isolation of virus
- Viral serology to identify virus
TREATMENT LOC
If no complications, treat symptoms
- Paracetamol 1 g every 4-6 hours (max: 4 g/ day)
Child: 10 mg/kg per dose
For nasal congestion
- Use steam inhalation prn
- Or xylometazoline nose drops 0.05 -0.1% 2-3 drops
into each nostril 3 times daily (max: 5 days)
In the breastfeeding child
- If blockage interferes with breastfeeding, clean/ clear
nose with normal saline
- Keep child warm
- Breastfeed more frequently
For troublesome cough
- Frequent warm drinks, home remedies (honey, ginger)
HC2
HC4
Prevention
~ Avoid contact with infected persons
~ Inactivated Influenza vaccine yearly (for vulnerable populations)
351
Uganda Clinical Guidelines 2023CHAPTER 5: Respiratory Diseases
